index: hide
name: Helminth Virulence

Helminths, or parasitic worms, are multicellular eukaryotic parasites that depend heavily on virulence factors that allow them to gain entry to host tissues. For example, the aquatic larval form of  **Schistosoma mansoni**, which causes  **schistosomiasis**, penetrates intact skin with the aid of proteases that degrade skin proteins, including elastin.

To survive within the host long enough to perpetuate their often-complex life cycles, helminths need to evade the immune system. Some helminths are so large that the immune system is ineffective against them. Others, such as adult  **roundworms** (which cause  **trichinosis**,  **ascariasis**, and other diseases), are protected by a tough outer cuticle.

Over the course of their life cycles, the surface characteristics of the parasites vary, which may help prevent an effective immune response. Some helminths express polysaccharides called  **glycans** on their external surface; because these glycans resemble molecules produced by host cells, the immune system fails to recognize and attack the helminth as a foreign body. This “ **glycan gimmickry**,” as it has been called, serves as a protective cloak that allows the helminth to escape detection by the immune system.

In addition to evading host defenses, helminths can actively suppress the immune system.  *S. mansoni*, for example, degrades host antibodies with  **proteases**. Helminths produce many other substances that suppress elements of both innate nonspecific and adaptive specific host defenses. They also release large amounts of material into the host that may locally overwhelm the immune system or cause it to respond inappropriately.
