index: hide
name: Lung Volumes and Capacities

Different animals have different lung capacities based on their activities. Cheetahs have evolved a much higher lung capacity than humans; it helps provide oxygen to all the muscles in the body and allows them to run very fast. Elephants also have a high lung capacity. In this case, it is not because they run fast but because they have a large body and must be able to take up oxygen in accordance with their body size.

Human lung size is determined by genetics, sex, and height. At maximal capacity, an average lung can hold almost six liters of air, but lungs do not usually operate at maximal capacity. Air in the lungs is measured in terms of  **lung volumes** and  **lung capacities** ( and ). Volume measures the amount of air for one function (such as inhalation or exhalation). Capacity is any two or more volumes (for example, how much can be inhaled from the end of a maximal exhalation).


{image:'Figure_39_2_1}
        


****

| Volume/Capacity | Definition | Volume (liters) | Equations |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Tidal volume (TV) | Amount of air inhaled during a normal breath | 0.5 | - |
| Expiratory reserve volume (ERV) | Amount of air that can be exhaled after a normal exhalation | 1.2 | - |
| Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) | Amount of air that can be further inhaled after a normal inhalation | 3.1 | - |
| Residual volume (RV) | Air left in the lungs after a forced exhalation | 1.2 | - |
| Vital capacity (VC) | Maximum amount of air that can be moved in or out of the lungs in a single respiratory cycle | 4.8 | ERV+TV+IRV |
| Inspiratory capacity (IC) | Volume of air that can be inhaled in addition to a normal exhalation | 3.6 | TV+IRV |
| Functional residual capacity (FRC) | Volume of air remaining after a normal exhalation | 2.4 | ERV+RV |
| Total lung capacity (TLC) | Total volume of air in the lungs after a maximal inspiration | 6.0 | RV+ERV+TV+IRV |
| Forced expiratory volume (FEV1) | How much air can be forced out of the lungs over a specific time period, usually one second | ~4.1 to 5.5 | - |
    

The volume in the lung can be divided into four units: tidal volume, expiratory reserve volume, inspiratory reserve volume, and residual volume.  **Tidal volume (TV)** measures the amount of air that is inspired and expired during a normal breath. On average, this volume is around one-half liter, which is a little less than the capacity of a 20-ounce drink bottle. The  **expiratory reserve volume (ERV)** is the additional amount of air that can be exhaled after a normal exhalation. It is the reserve amount that can be exhaled beyond what is normal. Conversely, the  **inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)** is the additional amount of air that can be inhaled after a normal inhalation. The  **residual volume (RV)** is the amount of air that is left after expiratory reserve volume is exhaled. The lungs are never completely empty: There is always some air left in the lungs after a maximal exhalation. If this residual volume did not exist and the lungs emptied completely, the lung tissues would stick together and the energy necessary to re-inflate the lung could be too great to overcome. Therefore, there is always some air remaining in the lungs. Residual volume is also important for preventing large fluctuations in respiratory gases (O<sub>2</sub> and CO<sub>2</sub>). The residual volume is the only lung volume that cannot be measured directly because it is impossible to completely empty the lung of air. This volume can only be calculated rather than measured.

Capacities are measurements of two or more volumes. The  **vital capacity (VC)** measures the maximum amount of air that can be inhaled or exhaled during a respiratory cycle. It is the sum of the expiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume. The  **inspiratory capacity (IC)** is the amount of air that can be inhaled after the end of a normal expiration. It is, therefore, the sum of the tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume. The  **functional residual capacity (FRC)** includes the expiratory reserve volume and the residual volume. The FRC measures the amount of additional air that can be exhaled after a normal exhalation. Lastly, the  **total lung capacity (TLC)** is a measurement of the total amount of air that the lung can hold. It is the sum of the residual volume, expiratory reserve volume, tidal volume, and inspiratory reserve volume.

Lung volumes are measured by a technique called  **spirometry**. An important measurement taken during spirometry is the  **forced expiratory volume (FEV)**, which measures how much air can be forced out of the lung over a specific period, usually one second (FEV1). In addition, the forced vital capacity (FVC), which is the total amount of air that can be forcibly exhaled, is measured. The ratio of these values ( **FEV1/FVC ratio**) is used to diagnose lung diseases including asthma, emphysema, and fibrosis. If the FEV1/FVC ratio is high, the lungs are not compliant (meaning they are stiff and unable to bend properly), and the patient most likely has lung fibrosis. Patients exhale most of the lung volume very quickly. Conversely, when the FEV1/FVC ratio is low, there is resistance in the lung that is characteristic of asthma. In this instance, it is hard for the patient to get the air out of his or her lungs, and it takes a long time to reach the maximal exhalation volume. In either case, breathing is difficult and complications arise.
