index: hide
name: Carbohydrates

The term carbohydrate means “hydrated carbon.” Recall that the root hydro- indicates water. A  **carbohydrate** is a molecule composed of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen; in most carbohydrates, hydrogen and oxygen are found in the same two-to-one relative proportions they have in water. In fact, the chemical formula for a “generic” molecule of carbohydrate is (CH<sub>2</sub>O) *n*.

Carbohydrates are referred to as saccharides, a word meaning “sugars.” Three forms are important in the body. Monosaccharides are the monomers of carbohydrates. Disaccharides (di- = “two”) are made up of two monomers.  **Polysaccharides** are the polymers, and can consist of hundreds to thousands of monomers.

## Monosaccharides

A  **monosaccharide** is a monomer of carbohydrates. Five monosaccharides are important in the body. Three of these are the hexose sugars, so called because they each contain six atoms of carbon. These are glucose, fructose, and galactose, shown in {'Figure_2_5_1 Figure 2.5.1} **a**. The remaining monosaccharides are the two pentose sugars, each of which contains five atoms of carbon. They are ribose and deoxyribose, shown in {'Figure_2_5_1 Figure 2.5.1} **b**.


{image:'Figure_2_5_1}
        

## Disaccharides

A  **disaccharide** is a pair of monosaccharides. Disaccharides are formed via dehydration synthesis, and the bond linking them is referred to as a glycosidic bond (glyco- = “sugar”). Three disaccharides (shown in {'Figure_2_5_2 Figure 2.5.2}) are important to humans. These are sucrose, commonly referred to as table sugar; lactose, or milk sugar; and maltose, or malt sugar. As you can tell from their common names, you consume these in your diet; however, your body cannot use them directly. Instead, in the digestive tract, they are split into their component monosaccharides via hydrolysis.


{image:'Figure_2_5_2}
        

## Polysaccharides

Polysaccharides can contain a few to a thousand or more monosaccharides. Three are important to the body ({'Figure_2_5_3 Figure 2.5.3}):

  * Starches are polymers of glucose. They occur in long chains called amylose or branched chains called amylopectin, both of which are stored in plant-based foods and are relatively easy to digest.
  * Glycogen is also a polymer of glucose, but it is stored in the tissues of animals, especially in the muscles and liver. It is not considered a dietary carbohydrate because very little glycogen remains in animal tissues after slaughter; however, the human body stores excess glucose as glycogen, again, in the muscles and liver.
  * Cellulose, a polysaccharide that is the primary component of the cell wall of green plants, is the component of plant food referred to as “fiber”. In humans, cellulose/fiber is not digestible; however, dietary fiber has many health benefits. It helps you feel full so you eat less, it promotes a healthy digestive tract, and a diet high in fiber is thought to reduce the risk of heart disease and possibly some forms of cancer.


{image:'Figure_2_5_3}
        

## Functions of Carbohydrates

The body obtains carbohydrates from plant-based foods. Grains, fruits, and legumes and other vegetables provide most of the carbohydrate in the human diet, although lactose is found in dairy products.

Although most body cells can break down other organic compounds for fuel, all body cells can use glucose. Moreover, nerve cells (neurons) in the brain, spinal cord, and through the peripheral nervous system, as well as red blood cells, can use only glucose for fuel. In the breakdown of glucose for energy, molecules of adenosine triphosphate, better known as ATP, are produced.  **Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)** is composed of a ribose sugar, an adenine base, and three phosphate groups. ATP releases free energy when its phosphate bonds are broken, and thus supplies ready energy to the cell. More ATP is produced in the presence of oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) than in pathways that do not use oxygen. The overall reaction for the conversion of the energy in glucose to energy stored in ATP can be written:

<math display="block" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"> <mrow>  <msub>   <mtext>C</mtext>   <mtext>6</mtext>  </msub>  <msub>   <mtext>H</mtext>   <mrow>    <mtext>12</mtext>   </mrow>  </msub>  <msub>   <mtext>O</mtext>   <mtext>6</mtext>  </msub>  <msub>   <mrow>    <mtext> + 6 O</mtext>   </mrow>   <mtext>2</mtext>  </msub>  <mtext> </mtext><mo stretchy="false">→</mo><msub>   <mrow>    <mtext> 6 CO</mtext>   </mrow>   <mtext>2</mtext>  </msub>  <msub>   <mrow>    <mtext> + 6 H</mtext>   </mrow>   <mtext>2</mtext>  </msub>  <mtext>O + ATP</mtext> </mrow></math>

In addition to being a critical fuel source, carbohydrates are present in very small amounts in cells’ structure. For instance, some carbohydrate molecules bind with proteins to produce glycoproteins, and others combine with lipids to produce glycolipids, both of which are found in the membrane that encloses the contents of body cells.
