index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.3.2
title: 12.4.3.2 - Zonal Average Atmospheric Temperature

Zonal temperature changes at the end of the 21st century show warming throughout the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} and, depending on the scenario, a mix of warming and cooling in the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} ({'Figure_12_12 Figure 12.12}). The maximum warming in the tropical upper troposphere is consistent with theoretical explanations and associated with a decline in the moist adiabatic {Glossary.*Lapse_rate lapse rate} of temperature in the tropics as the climate warms ({cite.12.'Bony_et_al_2006}). The northern polar regions also experience large warming in the lower {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}, consistent with the mechanisms discussed in {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_3.12_4_3_1 Section 12.4.3.1}. The tropospheric patterns are similar to those in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} and {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} with the {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} changes being up to several degrees warmer in the tropics compared to the A1B changes appearing in the AR4. Similar tropospheric patterns appear in the RCP 2.6 and 4.5 changes, but with reduced magnitudes, suggesting some degree of scaling with {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} change in the troposphere, similar to behaviour discussed in the AR4 and {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_2 Section 12.4.2}. The consistency of tropospheric patterns over multiple generations of models indicates high confidence in these {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} changes.

{image:'Figure_12_12}

In the stratosphere, the models show similar tropical patterns of change, with magnitudes differing according to the degree of climate forcing. Substantial differences appear in polar regions. In the north, RCP8.5 and 4.5 yield cooling, though it is more significant in the RCP8.5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}. In contrast, {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} shows warming, albeit weak and with little significance. In the southern polar {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, RCP 2.6 and 4.5 both show significant warming, and RCP8.5 is the outlier, with significant cooling. The polar stratospheric warming, especially in the SH, is similar to that found by {cite.12.'Butchart_et_al_2010 Butchart et al. (2010)} and {cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2012 Meehl et al. (2012)} in {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCM} simulations that showed effects of {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} recovery in determining the patterns ({cite.12.'Baldwin_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Son_et_al_2010}). {cite.12.'Eyring_et_al_2013 Eyring et al. (2013)} find behaviour in the CMIP5 ensemble both for models with and without interactive chemistry that supports the contention that the polar stratospheric changes in {'Figure_12_12 Figure 12.12} are strongly influenced by ozone recovery. Overall, the stratospheric temperature changes do not exhibit pattern scaling with global temperature change and are dependent on ozone recovery.

Away from the polar stratosphere, there is physical and pattern consistency in temperature changes between different generations of models assessed here and in the TAR and AR4. The consistency is especially clear in the northern high latitudes and, coupled with physical understanding, indicates that some of the greatest warming is very likely to occur here. There is also consistency across generations of models in relatively large warming in the tropical upper troposphere. {cite.12.'Allen_and_Sherwood_2008 Allen and Sherwood (2008)} and {cite.12.'Johnson_and_Xie_2010 Johnson and Xie (2010)} have presented dynamic and thermodynamic arguments, respectively, for the physical robustness of the tropical behaviour. However, there remains uncertainty about the magnitude of warming simulated in the tropical upper troposphere because large observational {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} and contradictory analyses limit a confident assessment of model accuracy in simulating temperature trends in the tropical upper troposphere ({Chapters.9.9_4.9_4_1.9_4_1_4.9_4_1_4_2 Section 9.4.1.4.2}). The combined evidence indicates that relatively large warming in the tropical upper troposphere is likely, but with medium confidence.
