index: hide
name: VSEPR Theory

 **Valence shell electron-pair repulsion theory (VSEPR theory)** enables us to predict the molecular structure, including approximate bond angles around a central atom, of a molecule from an examination of the number of bonds and lone electron pairs in its Lewis structure. The VSEPR model assumes that electron pairs in the valence shell of a central atom will adopt an arrangement that minimizes repulsions between these electron pairs by maximizing the distance between them. The electrons in the valence shell of a central atom form either bonding pairs of electrons, located primarily between bonded atoms, or lone pairs. The electrostatic repulsion of these electrons is reduced when the various regions of high electron density assume positions as far from each other as possible.

VSEPR theory predicts the arrangement of electron pairs around each central atom and, usually, the correct arrangement of atoms in a molecule. We should understand, however, that the theory only considers electron-pair repulsions. Other interactions, such as nuclear-nuclear repulsions and nuclear-electron attractions, are also involved in the final arrangement that atoms adopt in a particular molecular structure.

As a simple example of VSEPR theory, let us predict the structure of a gaseous BeF<sub>2</sub> molecule. The Lewis structure of BeF<sub>2</sub> ({'Figure_7_6_BeF2 Figure 7.6.BeF2}) shows only two electron pairs around the central beryllium atom. With two bonds and no lone pairs of electrons on the central atom, the bonds are as far apart as possible, and the electrostatic repulsion between these regions of high electron density is reduced to a minimum when they are on opposite sides of the central atom. The bond angle is 180° ({'Figure_7_6_BeF2 Figure 7.6.BeF2}).


{image:'Figure_7_6_BeF2}
        

{'Figure_7_6_Egeom Figure 7.6.Egeom} illustrates this and other electron-pair geometries that minimize the repulsions among regions of high electron density (bonds and/or lone pairs). Two regions of electron density around a central atom in a molecule form a  **linear** geometry; three regions form a  **trigonal planar** geometry; four regions form a  **tetrahedral** geometry; five regions form a  **trigonal bipyramidal** geometry; and six regions form an  **octahedral** geometry.


{image:'Figure_7_6_Egeom}
        

## Electron-pair Geometry versus Molecular Structure

It is important to note that electron-pair geometry around a central atom is  *not* the same thing as its molecular structure. The electron-pair geometries shown in {'Figure_7_6_Egeom Figure 7.6.Egeom} describe all regions where electrons are located, bonds as well as lone pairs. Molecular structure describes the location of the  *atoms*, not the electrons.

We differentiate between these two situations by naming the geometry that includes  *all* electron pairs the  **electron-pair geometry**. The structure that includes only the placement of the atoms in the molecule is called the  **molecular structure**. The electron-pair geometries will be the same as the molecular structures when there are no lone electron pairs around the central atom, but they will be different when there are lone pairs present on the central atom.

For example, the methane molecule, CH<sub>4</sub>, which is the major component of natural gas, has four bonding pairs of electrons around the central carbon atom; the electron-pair geometry is tetrahedral, as is the molecular structure ({'Figure_7_6_CH4 Figure 7.6.CH4}). On the other hand, the ammonia molecule, NH<sub>3</sub>, also has four electron pairs associated with the nitrogen atom, and thus has a tetrahedral electron-pair geometry. One of these regions, however, is a lone pair, which is not included in the molecular structure, and this lone pair influences the shape of the molecule ({'Figure_7_6_NH3 Figure 7.6.NH3}).


{image:'Figure_7_6_CH4}
        


{image:'Figure_7_6_NH3}
        

As seen in {'Figure_7_6_NH3 Figure 7.6.NH3}, small distortions from the ideal angles in {'Figure_7_6_Egeom Figure 7.6.Egeom} can result from differences in repulsion between various regions of electron density. VSEPR theory predicts these distortions by establishing an order of repulsions and an order of the amount of space occupied by different kinds of electron pairs. The order of electron-pair repulsions from greatest to least repulsion is:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mtext>lone pair-lone pair</mtext><mo>&gt;</mo><mtext>lone pair-bonding pair</mtext><mo>&gt;</mo><mtext>bonding pair-bonding pair</mtext></mrow></math>

This order of repulsions determines the amount of space occupied by different regions of electrons. A lone pair of electrons occupies a larger region of space than the electrons in a triple bond; in turn, electrons in a triple bond occupy more space than those in a double bond, and so on. The order of sizes from largest to smallest is:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mtext>lone pair</mtext><mo>&gt;</mo><mtext>triple bond</mtext><mo>&gt;</mo><mtext>double bond</mtext><mo>&gt;</mo><mtext>single bond</mtext></mrow></math>

Consider formaldehyde, H<sub>2</sub>CO, which is used as a preservative for biological and anatomical specimens ({'Figure_7_6_CH2O Figure 7.6.CH2O}). This molecule has regions of high electron density that consist of two single bonds and one double bond. The basic geometry is trigonal planar with 120° bond angles, but we see that the double bond causes slightly larger angles (121°), and the angle between the single bonds is slightly smaller (118°).

In the ammonia molecule, the three hydrogen atoms attached to the central nitrogen are not arranged in a flat, trigonal planar molecular structure, but rather in a three-dimensional trigonal pyramid ({'Figure_7_6_NH3 Figure 7.6.NH3}) with the nitrogen atom at the apex and the three hydrogen atoms forming the base. The ideal bond angles in a trigonal pyramid are based on the tetrahedral electron pair geometry. Again, there are slight deviations from the ideal because lone pairs occupy larger regions of space than do bonding electrons. The H–N–H bond angles in NH<sub>3</sub> are slightly smaller than the 109.5° angle in a regular tetrahedron ({'Figure_7_6_Egeom Figure 7.6.Egeom}) because the lone pair-bonding pair repulsion is greater than the bonding pair-bonding pair repulsion ({'Figure_7_6_NH3 Figure 7.6.NH3}). {'Figure_7_6_molgeom Figure 7.6.molgeom} illustrates the ideal molecular structures, which are predicted based on the electron-pair geometries for various combinations of lone pairs and bonding pairs.


{image:'Figure_7_6_molgeom}
        

According to VSEPR theory, the terminal atom locations (Xs in {'Figure_7_6_molgeom Figure 7.6.molgeom}) are equivalent within the linear, trigonal planar, and tetrahedral electron-pair geometries (the first three rows of the table). It does not matter which X is replaced with a lone pair because the molecules can be rotated to convert positions. For trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometries, however, there are two distinct X positions, as shown in {'Figure_7_6_Axeq Figure 7.6.Axeq}: an  **axial position** (if we hold a model of a trigonal bipyramid by the two axial positions, we have an axis around which we can rotate the model) and an  **equatorial position** (three positions form an equator around the middle of the molecule). As shown in {'Figure_7_6_molgeom Figure 7.6.molgeom}, the axial position is surrounded by bond angles of 90°, whereas the equatorial position has more space available because of the 120° bond angles. In a trigonal bipyramidal electron-pair geometry, lone pairs always occupy equatorial positions because these more spacious positions can more easily accommodate the larger lone pairs.

Theoretically, we can come up with three possible arrangements for the three bonds and two lone pairs for the ClF<sub>3</sub> molecule ({'Figure_7_6_Axeq Figure 7.6.Axeq}). The stable structure is the one that puts the lone pairs in equatorial locations, giving a T-shaped molecular structure.


{image:'Figure_7_6_Axeq}
        

When a central atom has two lone electron pairs and four bonding regions, we have an octahedral electron-pair geometry. The two lone pairs are on opposite sides of the octahedron (180° apart), giving a square planar molecular structure that minimizes lone pair-lone pair repulsions ({'Figure_7_6_molgeom Figure 7.6.molgeom}).

## Predicting Electron Pair Geometry and Molecular Structure

The following procedure uses VSEPR theory to determine the electron pair geometries and the molecular structures:

  1. Write the Lewis structure of the molecule or polyatomic ion.
  2. Count the number of regions of electron density (lone pairs and bonds) around the central atom. A single, double, or triple bond counts as one region of electron density.
  3. Identify the electron-pair geometry based on the number of regions of electron density: linear, trigonal planar, tetrahedral, trigonal bipyramidal, or octahedral ({'Figure_7_6_molgeom Figure 7.6.molgeom}, first column).
  4. Use the number of lone pairs to determine the molecular structure ({'Figure_7_6_molgeom Figure 7.6.molgeom}). If more than one arrangement of lone pairs and chemical bonds is possible, choose the one that will minimize repulsions, remembering that lone pairs occupy more space than multiple bonds, which occupy more space than single bonds. In trigonal bipyramidal arrangements, repulsion is minimized when every lone pair is in an equatorial position. In an octahedral arrangement with two lone pairs, repulsion is minimized when the lone pairs are on opposite sides of the central atom.

The following examples illustrate the use of VSEPR theory to predict the molecular structure of molecules or ions that have no lone pairs of electrons. In this case, the molecular structure is identical to the electron pair geometry.

The next several examples illustrate the effect of lone pairs of electrons on molecular structure.

## Molecular Structure for Multicenter Molecules

When a molecule or polyatomic ion has only one central atom, the molecular structure completely describes the shape of the molecule. Larger molecules do not have a single central atom, but are connected by a chain of interior atoms that each possess a “local” geometry. The way these local structures are oriented with respect to each other also influences the molecular shape, but such considerations are largely beyond the scope of this introductory discussion. For our purposes, we will only focus on determining the local structures.
