index: hide
name: Sensory Receptors

Stimuli in the environment activate specialized receptor cells in the peripheral nervous system. Different types of stimuli are sensed by different types of receptor cells. Receptor cells can be classified into types on the basis of three different criteria: cell type, position, and function. Receptors can be classified structurally on the basis of cell type and their position in relation to stimuli they sense. They can also be classified functionally on the basis of the  **transduction** of stimuli, or how the mechanical stimulus, light, or chemical changed the cell membrane potential.

## Structural Receptor Types

The cells that interpret information about the environment can be either (1) a neuron that has a  **free nerve ending**, with dendrites embedded in tissue that would receive a sensation; (2) a neuron that has an  **encapsulated ending** in which the sensory nerve endings are encapsulated in connective tissue that enhances their sensitivity; or (3) a specialized  **receptor cell**, which has distinct structural components that interpret a specific type of stimulus ({'Figure_14_1_1 Figure 14.1.1}). The pain and temperature receptors in the dermis of the skin are examples of neurons that have free nerve endings. Also located in the dermis of the skin are lamellated corpuscles, neurons with encapsulated nerve endings that respond to pressure and touch. The cells in the retina that respond to light stimuli are an example of a specialized receptor, a  **photoreceptor**.


{image:'Figure_14_1_1}
        

Another way that receptors can be classified is based on their location relative to the stimuli. An  **exteroceptor** is a receptor that is located near a stimulus in the external environment, such as the somatosensory receptors that are located in the skin. An  **interoceptor** is one that interprets stimuli from internal organs and tissues, such as the receptors that sense the increase in blood pressure in the aorta or carotid sinus. Finally, a  **proprioceptor** is a receptor located near a moving part of the body, such as a muscle, that interprets the positions of the tissues as they move.

## Functional Receptor Types

A third classification of receptors is by how the receptor transduces stimuli into membrane potential changes. Stimuli are of three general types. Some stimuli are ions and macromolecules that affect transmembrane receptor proteins when these chemicals diffuse across the cell membrane. Some stimuli are physical variations in the environment that affect receptor cell membrane potentials. Other stimuli include the electromagnetic radiation from visible light. For humans, the only electromagnetic energy that is perceived by our eyes is visible light. Some other organisms have receptors that humans lack, such as the heat sensors of snakes, the ultraviolet light sensors of bees, or magnetic receptors in migratory birds.

Receptor cells can be further categorized on the basis of the type of stimuli they transduce. Chemical stimuli can be interpreted by a  **chemoreceptor** that interprets chemical stimuli, such as an object’s taste or smell.  **Osmoreceptors** respond to solute concentrations of body fluids. Additionally, pain is primarily a chemical sense that interprets the presence of chemicals from tissue damage, or similar intense stimuli, through a  **nociceptor**. Physical stimuli, such as pressure and vibration, as well as the sensation of sound and body position (balance), are interpreted through a  **mechanoreceptor**. Another physical stimulus that has its own type of receptor is temperature, which is sensed through a  **thermoreceptor** that is either sensitive to temperatures above (heat) or below (cold) normal body temperature.
