index: hide
name: Muscles of the Thorax

The muscles of the chest serve to facilitate breathing by changing the size of the thoracic cavity (). When you inhale, your chest rises because the cavity expands. Alternately, when you exhale, your chest falls because the thoracic cavity decreases in size.


****

| Movement | Target | Target motion direction | Prime mover | Origin | Insertion |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Inhalation; exhalation | Thoracic cavity | Compression; expansion | Diaphragm | Sternum; ribs 6–12; lumbar vertebrae | Central tendon |
| Inhalation;exhalation | Ribs | Elevation (expands thoracic cavity) | External intercostals | Rib superior to each intercostal muscle | Rib inferior to each intercostal muscle |
| Forced exhalation | Ribs | Movement along superior/inferior axis to bring ribs closer together | Internal intercostals | Rib inferior to each intercostal muscle | Rib superior to each intercostal muscle |
    

## The Diaphragm

The change in volume of the thoracic cavity during breathing is due to the alternate contraction and relaxation of the  **diaphragm** ({'Figure_11_4_2 Figure 11.4.2}). It separates the thoracic and abdominal cavities, and is dome-shaped at rest. The superior surface of the diaphragm is convex, creating the elevated floor of the thoracic cavity. The inferior surface is concave, creating the curved roof of the abdominal cavity.


{image:'Figure_11_4_2}
        

Defecating, urination, and even childbirth involve cooperation between the diaphragm and abdominal muscles (this cooperation is referred to as the “Valsalva maneuver”). You hold your breath by a steady contraction of the diaphragm; this stabilizes the volume and pressure of the peritoneal cavity. When the abdominal muscles contract, the pressure cannot push the diaphragm up, so it increases pressure on the intestinal tract (defecation), urinary tract (urination), or reproductive tract (childbirth).

The inferior surface of the pericardial sac and the inferior surfaces of the pleural membranes (parietal pleura) fuse onto the central tendon of the diaphragm. To the sides of the tendon are the skeletal muscle portions of the diaphragm, which insert into the tendon while having a number of origins including the xiphoid process of the sternum anteriorly, the inferior six ribs and their cartilages laterally, and the lumbar vertebrae and 12th ribs posteriorly.

The diaphragm also includes three openings for the passage of structures between the thorax and the abdomen. The inferior vena cava passes through the  **caval opening**, and the esophagus and attached nerves pass through the esophageal hiatus. The aorta, thoracic duct, and azygous vein pass through the aortic hiatus of the posterior diaphragm.

## The Intercostal Muscles

There are three sets of muscles, called  **intercostal muscles**, which span each of the intercostal spaces. The principal role of the intercostal muscles is to assist in breathing by changing the dimensions of the rib cage ({'Figure_11_4_3 Figure 11.4.3}).


{image:'Figure_11_4_3}
        

The 11 pairs of superficial  **external intercostal** muscles aid in inspiration of air during breathing because when they contract, they raise the rib cage, which expands it. The 11 pairs of  **internal intercostal** muscles, just under the externals, are used for expiration because they draw the ribs together to constrict the rib cage. The  **innermost intercostal** muscles are the deepest, and they act as synergists for the action of the internal intercostals.
