index: hide
name: Muscles of the Pelvic Floor and Perineum

The pelvic floor is a muscular sheet that defines the inferior portion of the pelvic cavity. The  **pelvic diaphragm**, spanning anteriorly to posteriorly from the pubis to the coccyx, comprises the levator ani and the ischiococcygeus. Its openings include the anal canal and urethra, and the vagina in women.

The large  **levator ani** consists of two skeletal muscles, the  **pubococcygeus** and the  **iliococcygeus** ({'Figure_11_4_4 Figure 11.4.4}). The levator ani is considered the most important muscle of the pelvic floor because it supports the pelvic viscera. It resists the pressure produced by contraction of the abdominal muscles so that the pressure is applied to the colon to aid in defecation and to the uterus to aid in childbirth (assisted by the  **ischiococcygeus**, which pulls the coccyx anteriorly). This muscle also creates skeletal muscle sphincters at the urethra and anus.


{image:'Figure_11_4_4}
        

The  **perineum** is the diamond-shaped space between the pubic symphysis (anteriorly), the coccyx (posteriorly), and the ischial tuberosities (laterally), lying just inferior to the pelvic diaphragm (levator ani and coccygeus). Divided transversely into triangles, the anterior is the  **urogenital triangle**, which includes the external genitals. The posterior is the  **anal triangle**, which contains the anus ({'Figure_11_4_5 Figure 11.4.5}). The perineum is also divided into superficial and deep layers with some of the muscles common to men and women ({'Figure_11_4_6 Figure 11.4.6}). Women also have the  **compressor urethrae** and the  **sphincter urethrovaginalis**, which function to close the vagina. In men, there is the  **deep transverse perineal** muscle that plays a role in ejaculation.


{image:'Figure_11_4_5}
        


{image:'Figure_11_4_6}
        
