index: hide
name: Other Factors Influencing Heart Rate

Using a combination of autorhythmicity and innervation, the cardiovascular center is able to provide relatively precise control over HR. However, there are a number of other factors that have an impact on HR as well, including epinephrine, NE, and thyroid hormones; levels of various ions including calcium, potassium, and sodium; body temperature; hypoxia; and pH balance ( and ). After reading this section, the importance of maintaining homeostasis should become even more apparent.


****

| Factor | Effect |
|:-:|:-:|
| Cardioaccelerator nerves | Release of norepinephrine by cardioinhibitory nerves |
| Proprioreceptors | Increased firing rates of proprioreceptors (e.g. during exercise) |
| Chemoreceptors | Chemoreceptors sensing decreased levels of O<sub>2</sub> or increased levels of H<sup>+</sup>, CO<sub>2</sub> and lactic acid  |
| Baroreceptors | Decreased firing rates of baroreceptors (indicating falling blood volume/pressure) |
| Limbic system | Anticipation of physical exercise or strong emotions by the limbic system |
| Catecholamines | Increased epinephrine and norepinephrine release by the adrenal glands |
| Thyroid hormones | Increased T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> in the blood (released by thyroid) |
| Calcium | Increase in calcium ions in the blood |
| Potassium | Decrease in potassium ions in the blood |
| Sodium | Decrease in sodium ions in the blood |
| Body temperature | Increase in body temperature |
| Nicotine and caffeine | Presence of nicotine, caffeine or other stimulants |
    


****

| Factor | Effect |
|:-:|:-:|
| Cardioinhibitor nerves (vagus) | Release of acetylcholine by cardioaccelerator nerves |
| Proprioreceptors | Decreased firing rates of proprioreceptors (e.g. during rest) |
| Chemoreceptors | Chemoreceptors sensing increased levels of O<sub>2</sub> or decreased levels of H<sup>+</sup>, CO<sub>2</sub> and lactic acid  |
| Baroreceptors | Increased firing rates of baroreceptors (indicating rising blood volume/pressure) |
| Limbic system | Anticipation of relaxation by the limbic system |
| Catecholamines | Increased epinephrine and norepinephrine release by the adrenal glands |
| Thyroid hormones | Decreased T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> in the blood (released by thyroid) |
| Calcium | Increase in calcium ions in the blood |
| Potassium | Increase in potassium ions in the blood |
| Sodium | Increase in sodium ions in the blood |
| Body temperature | Decrease in body temperature |
| Opiates and tranquilizers | Presence of opiates (heroin), tranquilizers or other depressants |
    

## Epinephrine and Norepinephrine

The catecholamines, epinephrine and NE, secreted by the adrenal medulla form one component of the extended fight-or-flight mechanism. The other component is sympathetic stimulation. Epinephrine and NE have similar effects: binding to the beta-1 receptors, and opening sodium and calcium ion chemical- or ligand-gated channels. The rate of depolarization is increased by this additional influx of positively charged ions, so the threshold is reached more quickly and the period of repolarization is shortened. However, massive releases of these hormones coupled with sympathetic stimulation may actually lead to arrhythmias. There is no parasympathetic stimulation to the adrenal medulla.

## Thyroid Hormones

In general, increased levels of thyroid hormone, or thyroxin, increase cardiac rate and contractility. The impact of thyroid hormone is typically of a much longer duration than that of the catecholamines. The physiologically active form of thyroid hormone, T<sub>3</sub> or triiodothyronine, has been shown to directly enter cardiomyocytes and alter activity at the level of the genome. It also impacts the beta adrenergic response similar to epinephrine and NE described above. Excessive levels of thyroxin may trigger tachycardia.

## Calcium

Calcium ion levels have great impacts upon both HR and contractility; as the levels of calcium ions increase, so do HR and contractility. High levels of calcium ions (hypercalcemia) may be implicated in a short QT interval and a widened T wave in the ECG. The QT interval represents the time from the start of depolarization to repolarization of the ventricles, and includes the period of ventricular systole. Extremely high levels of calcium may induce cardiac arrest. Drugs known as calcium channel blockers slow HR by binding to these channels and blocking or slowing the inward movement of calcium ions.

## Caffeine and Nicotine

Caffeine and nicotine are not found naturally within the body. Both of these nonregulated drugs have an excitatory effect on membranes of neurons in general and have a stimulatory effect on the cardiac centers specifically, causing an increase in HR. Caffeine works by increasing the rates of depolarization at the SA node, whereas nicotine stimulates the activity of the sympathetic neurons that deliver impulses to the heart.

Although it is the world’s most widely consumed psychoactive drug, caffeine is legal and not regulated. While precise quantities have not been established, “normal” consumption is not considered harmful to most people, although it may cause disruptions to sleep and acts as a diuretic. Its consumption by pregnant women is cautioned against, although no evidence of negative effects has been confirmed. Tolerance and even physical and mental addiction to the drug result in individuals who routinely consume the substance.

Nicotine, too, is a stimulant and produces addiction. While legal and nonregulated, concerns about nicotine’s safety and documented links to respiratory and cardiac disease have resulted in warning labels on cigarette packages.

## Factors Decreasing Heart Rate

HR can be slowed when a person experiences altered sodium and potassium levels, hypoxia, acidosis, alkalosis, and hypothermia (see ). The relationship between electrolytes and HR is complex, but maintaining electrolyte balance is critical to the normal wave of depolarization. Of the two ions, potassium has the greater clinical significance. Initially, both hyponatremia (low sodium levels) and hypernatremia (high sodium levels) may lead to tachycardia. Severely high hypernatremia may lead to fibrillation, which may cause CO to cease. Severe hyponatremia leads to both bradycardia and other arrhythmias. Hypokalemia (low potassium levels) also leads to arrhythmias, whereas hyperkalemia (high potassium levels) causes the heart to become weak and flaccid, and ultimately to fail.

Acidosis is a condition in which excess hydrogen ions are present, and the patient’s blood expresses a low pH value. Alkalosis is a condition in which there are too few hydrogen ions, and the patient’s blood has an elevated pH. Normal blood pH falls in the range of 7.35–7.45, so a number lower than this range represents acidosis and a higher number represents alkalosis. Recall that enzymes are the regulators or catalysts of virtually all biochemical reactions; they are sensitive to pH and will change shape slightly with values outside their normal range. These variations in pH and accompanying slight physical changes to the active site on the enzyme decrease the rate of formation of the enzyme-substrate complex, subsequently decreasing the rate of many enzymatic reactions, which can have complex effects on HR. Severe changes in pH will lead to denaturation of the enzyme.

The last variable is body temperature. Elevated body temperature is called hyperthermia, and suppressed body temperature is called hypothermia. Slight hyperthermia results in increasing HR and strength of contraction. Hypothermia slows the rate and strength of heart contractions. This distinct slowing of the heart is one component of the larger diving reflex that diverts blood to essential organs while submerged. If sufficiently chilled, the heart will stop beating, a technique that may be employed during open heart surgery. In this case, the patient’s blood is normally diverted to an artificial heart-lung machine to maintain the body’s blood supply and gas exchange until the surgery is complete, and sinus rhythm can be restored. Excessive hyperthermia and hypothermia will both result in death, as enzymes drive the body systems to cease normal function, beginning with the central nervous system.
