index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.8
title: 4.8 - Synthesis

Observations show that the {Topics.*Climate_System cryosphere} has been in transition during the last few decades and that the strong and significant changes reported in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} have continued, and in many cases accelerated. The number of in situ and satellite observations of cryospheric parameters has increased considerably since AR4 and the use of the new data in {Glossary.*Trend trend} analyses, and also in process studies, has enabled increased confidence in the quantification of most of the changes. A graphical depiction and a text summary of observed changes in the various components of the {Glossary.*Cryosphere cryosphere} are provided in {'Figure_4_25 Figure 4.25}. They reveal a general decline in all components of the cryosphere, but the magnitude of the decline varies regionally and there are isolated cases where an increase is observed.

{image:'Figure_4_25}

Some of the observed changes since AR4 have been considerable and unexpected. One of the most visible was the dramatic decline in the September minimum sea ice cover in the Arctic in 2007, which was followed by a record low value in 2012, supporting observations that the thicker components of the Arctic sea ice cover are decreasing. The trend in extent for Arctic sea ice is –3.8 ± 0.3% per decade (very likely) while that for multi-year ice is –13.5 ± 2.5% per decade (very likely). Observations also show marked decreases in Arctic ice thickness and volume. The pattern of melt on the surface of the Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} has also changed radically, with melt occurring in 2012 over almost the entire surface of the ice sheet for the first time during the satellite era. The ice mass loss in Greenland has been observed to have increased from 34 [–6 to 74] Gt yr–1 for the period 1992–2001 to 215 [157 to 274] Gt yr–1 for the period 2002–2011 while the estimates of mass loss in Antarctica have increased from 30 [–37 to 97] Gt yr–1 during the 1992–2001 period to 147 [72 to 221] Gt yr–1 during the 2002–2011 period. Observed mass loss from glaciers has also increased, with the global mass loss (excluding the glaciers peripheral to the ice sheets) estimated to be 226 [91 to 361] Gt yr–1 during the 1971–2009 period, 275 [140 to 410] Gt yr–1 over the 1993–2009 period, and 301 [166 to 436] over the 2005–2009 period. A large majority of observing stations report decreasing trends in snow depth, snow duration, or {Glossary.*Snow_water_equivalent snow water equivalent}, and the largest decreases are typically observed at locations with temperatures close to freezing. Most lakes and rivers with long-term records have exhibited declines in ice duration and average seasonal ice cover. {Glossary.*Permafrost Permafrost} has also been degrading and retreating to the north while permafrost temperatures have increased in most regions since the 1980s.

The observed positive trend of sea ice extent in the Antarctic that was regarded as small and insignificant in AR4, has persisted, and increased slightly to about 1.5 ± 0.2% per decade. The higher-than-average Antarctic sea ice extent in recent years has been mainly due to increases in the Ross Sea {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, which more than offset the declines in the Bellingshausen Sea and Amundsen Sea. Ice production in coastal polynyas (regarded as ‘sea ice factories’) along the Ross {Glossary.*Sea_ice Sea ice} shelves have been observed to be increasing. Recent work suggests strengthening of the zonal (east-west) winds and accompanying ice drift accounts for some of the increasing sea ice extent.

Satellite data have provided the ability to observe large-scale changes in the cryosphere at relatively good temporal and spatial {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} throughout the globe. Largely because of the availability of high resolution satellite data, the first near-complete global glacial inventory has been generated, leading to a more precise determination of the past, current and future contribution of glaciers to sea level rise. As more data accumulate, and as more capable sensors are launched, the data become more valuable for studies related to change assessment. The advent of new satellites and airborne missions has provided powerful tools that have enabled breakthroughs in the capability to measure some parameters and enhance our ability to interpret results. However, a longer record of measurements of the cryosphere will help increase confidence in the results, reduce {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in the long-term trends, and bring more critical insights into the physical processes controlling the changes. There is thus a need for the continuation of the satellite records, and a requirement for longer and more reliable historical data from in situ measurements and proxies.

The {Glossary.*Sea_level_equivalent sea level equivalent} of mass loss from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets over the period 1993–2010, has been about 5.9 mm (including 1.7 mm from glaciers around Greenland) and 4.8 mm, respectively. The reliability of observations of ice loss from the ice sheets has been enhanced with the introduction of advanced satellite observation techniques. The ice loss from glaciers between 1993 and 2009 measured in terms of sea level equivalent (excluding those peripheral to the ice sheets) is estimated to be 13 mm. The inset to {'Figure_4_25 Figure 4.25} shows the cumulative sea level equivalent from glaciers and the ice sheets in Greenland and Antarctica. These have been contributing dominantly to sea level rise in recent decades. The contribution of the cryosphere to {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} is discussed more fully in {Chapters.13 Chapter 13}.

The overall consistency in the negative changes observed in the various components of the cryosphere ({'Figure_4_25 Figure 4.25}), and the acceleration of these changes in recent decades, provides a strong signal of climate change. Regional differences in the magnitude and direction of the signals are apparent, but these are not unexpected considering the large variability and complexity of atmospheric and oceanic circulations. It is very likely, however, that the Arctic has changed substantially since 1979.
