index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.3.2.2
title: 12.3.2.2 - Variations Between Model Forcing Implementations

Apart from the distinction between concentration-driven and {Topics.*Emissions emissions}-driven protocols, a number of variations are present in the implementation of forcing agents listed in {'Table_12_1 Table 12.1}, which generally arise due to constraining characteristics of the model formulations, various computational efficiency considerations or local implementation decisions. In a number of models, off-line modelling using an {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} chemistry climate model has been used to convert emissions into concentrations compatible with the specific model formulation or characteristics. As a result, although detailed prescriptions are given for the forcing agents in CMIP5 experiments in emissions terms, individual modelling approaches lead to considerable variations in their implementations and consequential RFs. This was also the case in the ENSEMBLES multi-model {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}, in which similar forcing agents to CMIP5 models were applied but again with variations in the implementation of aerosol, {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} and land use {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}, prescribing the SRES A1B and E1 {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} in a concentration-driven protocol ({cite.12.'Johns_et_al_2011}) akin to the CMIP5 protocol.

Methane, nitrous oxide and CFCs (typically with some aggregation of the multiple gases) are generally prescribed in CMIP5 models as wellmixed concentrations following the forcing data time series provided for the given scenarios. In a number of models (CESM1(WACCM), GFDL-CM3, GISS-E2-p2, GISS-E2-p3, HadGEM2-ES and MRI-ESM1) the three-dimensional concentrations in the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} of some species evolve interactively driven by the full emissions/sinks cycle (in some cases constrained by prescribed concentrations at the surface, e.g., HadGEM2-ES for methane). In cases where the full emissions/sinks cycle is modelled, the radiation scheme is usually passed the time-varying 3-D concentrations, but some models prescribe different concentrations for the purpose of radiation.

{cite.12.'Eyring_et_al_2013 Eyring et al. (2013)} document, in greater detail than {'Table_12_1 Table 12.1}, the implementations of tropospheric and stratospheric ozone in CMIP5 models, including their ozone chemistry schemes and modifications applied to reference data sets in models driven by concentrations. In most models that prescribe ozone, concentrations are based on the original or slightly modified CMIP5 standard ozone data set computed as part of the International Global Atmospheric Chemistry/Stratospheric Processes and their Role in Climate (IGAC/SPARC) activity ({cite.12.'Cionni_et_al_2011}). In the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere}, this data set is based on observations of the past ({cite.12.'Randel_and_Wu_2007}) continued into the future with the multi-model mean of 13 chemistry–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} (CCMs) projections following the SRES A1B ({cite.12.'IPCC_2000}) and SRES A1 adjusted halogen scenario ({cite.12.'WMO_2007}). The stratospheric zonal mean ozone field is merged with a 3-D tropospheric ozone time series generated as the mean of two CCMs (Goddard Institute of Space Studies-Physical Understanding of Composition-Climate Interactions and Impacts (GISS-PUCCINI), {cite.12.'Shindell_et_al_2006}; CAM3.5, {cite.12.'Lamarque_et_al_2010}) in the past and continued by one CCM (CAM3.5) in the future. Some CMIP5 models (MIROC-ESM, MIROC4h, MIROC5 and GISS-E2-p1) prescribe ozone concentrations using different data sets but again following just one GHG scenario in the future for the {Glossary.*Projection projection} of stratospheric ozone. In other models (e.g., Institut Pierre Simon Laplace (IPSL)-CM5, CCSM4) ozone is again prescribed, but supplied as concentrations from off-line computations using a related CCM. Some models determine ozone interactively from specified emissions via on-line atmospheric chemistry (CESM1(FASTCHEM), CESM1(WACCM), CNRM-CM5, GFDL-CM3, GISS-E2-p2, GISS-E2-p3, MIROC-ESM-CHEM, MRI-ESM1; and HadGEM2-ES for tropospheric ozone only). Computing ozone concentrations interactively allows the fast coupling between chemistry and climate to be captured, but modelling of chemistry processes is sometimes simplified (CNRM-CM5, CESM(FASTCHEM)) in comparison with full complexity CCMs to reduce the computational cost. Compared to CMIP3, in which all models prescribed ozone and around half of them used a fixed ozone climatology, this leads to substantial improvement to ozone forcings in CMIP5, although differences remain among the models with interactive chemistry.

For atmospheric aerosols, either aerosol precursor emissions-driven or concentration-driven forcings are applied depending on individual model characteristics (see Sections {Chapters.7.7_3 7.3} and {Chapters.7.7_4 7.4} for an assessment of aerosols processes including aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions). A larger fraction of models in CMIP5 than CMIP3 prescribe aerosol precursor emissions rather than concentrations. Many still prescribe concentrations pre-computed either using a directly related aerosol CCM or from output of another, complex, emissions-driven aerosol chemistry model within the CMIP5 process. As for ozone, aerosol concentrations provided from off-line simulations help to reduce the computational burden of the projections themselves. For several of the concentration-driven models (CCSM4, IPSL-CM5A variants, MPI-ESM-LR, MPI-ESM-MR), additional emissions-driven simulations have been undertaken to tailor the prescribed concentrations closely to the model’s individual aerosol–climate characteristics. Lamarque et al. (2010, 2011) provided the recommended CMIP5 aerosols data set which has been used in several of the models driven by concentrations. Compared with the CMIP3 models, a much larger fraction of CMIP5 models now incorporate black and organic carbon aerosol forcings. Also, a larger fraction of CMIP5 than CMIP3 models now includes a range of processes that combine in the effective RF from aerosol– cloud interactions ({Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_cloud_interactions ERFaci}; see {Chapters.7.7_1.7_1_3 Section 7.1.3} and {'Figure_7_3 Figure 7.3}). Previously such processes were generally termed aerosol indirect effects, usually separated into cloud {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} (or first indirect) effect and cloud {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} (or second indirect) effect. Many CMIP5 models only include the interaction between sulphate aerosol and cloud, and the majority of them only model the effect of aerosols on cloud albedo rather than cloud lifetime ({'Table_12_1 Table 12.1}). No CMIP5 models represent urban aerosol pollution explicitly so that is not listed in {'Table_12_1 Table 12.1} (see {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_5.11_3_5_2 Section 11.3.5.2} for discussion of future air quality). Only one model (GISS-E2) explicitly includes nitrate aerosol as a separate forcing, though it is also included within the total aerosol mixture in the Max Planck Institute-{Topics.*Climate_System Earth System} Model (MPI-ESM) model versions.

{Topics.*Land_Use_Change Land use change} is typically applied by blending {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} land surface disturbance via crop and pasture fraction changes with underlying land cover maps of natural vegetation, but model variations in the underlying land cover maps and {Glossary.*Biome biome} modelling mean that the land use forcing agent is impossible to impose in a completely common way at present ({cite.12.'Pitman_et_al_2009}). Most CMIP5 models represent crop and pasture disturbance separately, while some (Canadian Earth System Model (CanESM2), MIROC4h, MIROC5) represent crop but not pasture. Some models (e.g., HadGEM2-ES, MIROC-ESM and MPI-ESM versions) allow a dynamical representation of natural vegetation changes alongside anthropogenic disturbance (see also Sections {Chapters.9.9_4.9_4_4.9_4_4_3 9.4.4.3} and {Chapters.9.9_4.9_4_4.9_4_4_4 9.4.4.4}).

Treatment of the {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} emissions associated with land cover changes is also model dependent. Some models do not account for land cover changes at all, some simulate the biophysical effects but are still forced externally by land cover change induced CO2 emissions (in emissions-driven simulations), while the most advanced {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} simulate both biophysical effects of land cover changes and their associated CO2 emissions.
