index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.1.1
title: 7.1.1 - Clouds and Aerosols in the Atmosphere

The {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} is composed mostly of gases, but also contains liquid and solid matter in the form of particles. It is usual to distinguish these particles according to their size, chemical composition, water content and fall velocity into atmospheric aerosol particles, cloud particles and falling hydrometeors. Despite their small mass or volume fraction, particles in the atmosphere strongly influence the transfer of radiant energy and the spatial distribution of latent heating through the atmosphere, thereby influencing the weather and climate.

Cloud formation usually takes place in rising air, which expands and cools, thus permitting the activation of aerosol particles into cloud droplets and ice crystals in supersaturated air. Cloud particles are generally larger than aerosol particles and composed mostly of liquid water or ice. The evolution of a cloud is governed by the balance between a number of dynamical, radiative and microphysical processes. Cloud particles of sufficient size become falling hydrometeors, which are categorized as drizzle drops, raindrops, snow crystals, graupel and hailstones. Precipitation is an important and complex climate variable that is influenced by the distribution of moisture and cloudiness, and to a lesser extent by the concentrations and properties of aerosol particles.

{Glossary.*Aerosol Aerosol} particles interact with {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation} through absorption and scattering and, to a lesser extent with {Glossary.*Terrestrial_radiation terrestrial radiation} through absorption, scattering and {Topics.*Emissions emission}. Aerosols can serve as cloud condensation nuclei ({Glossary.*Cloud_condensation_nuclei CCN}) and ice nuclei (IN) upon which cloud droplets and ice crystals form. They also play a wider role in atmospheric chemistry and biogeochemical cycles in the {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system}, for instance, by carrying nutrients to ocean ecosystems. They can be of natural or {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} origin.

Cloud and aerosol amounts and properties are extremely variable in space and time. The short {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} of cloud particles in subsaturated air creates relatively sharp cloud edges and fine-scale variations in cloud properties, which is less typical of aerosol layers. While the distinction between aerosols and clouds is generally appropriate and useful, it is not always unambiguous, which can cause interpretational difficulties (e.g., {cite.7.'Charlson_et_al_2007}; {cite.7.'Koren_et_al_2007}).
