index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.5.2.2
title: 7.5.2.2 - Radiative Forcing by Species

AeroCom II studies have calculated {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} distributions using 1850 and 2000 simulations with the same meteorology to isolate {Glossary.*Radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_radiation_interactions RFari} for individual aerosol types (sulphate, {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} fossil-fuel plus biofuel, OA fossil-fuel and biofuel, {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} burning or BB, SOA, nitrate). Many of these models account for internal mixing, so that partitioning RFari by species is not straightforward, and different modelling groups adopt different techniques ({cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013}). Note also that due to internal mixing of aerosol types the total RFari is not necessarily the sum of the RFari from different types ({cite.7.'Ocko_et_al_2012}). Unless otherwise noted in the text below, the best estimate and 5 to 95% ranges for individual types quoted in {'Figure_7_18 Figure 7.18} are solely based on the AeroCom II range ({cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013}) and the estimates have been scaled by {Topics.*Emissions emissions} to derive 1750–2010 RFari values. Note that although global numbers are presented here, these RF estimates all exhibit large regional variations, and individual aerosol species can contribute significantly to {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} change despite rather small RF estimates (e.g., {cite.7.'Wang_et_al_2010b}).

{image:'Figure_7_18}

For sulphate, AeroCom II models give a RF median and 5 to 95% uncertainty range of –0.31 (–0.58 to –0.11) W m–2 for the 1850–2000 period, and –0.34 (–0.61 to –0.13) W m–2 for the 1750–2010 period. This estimate and uncertainty range are consistent with the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} estimate of –0.4 ± 0.2 W m–2, which is retained as the best estimate for AR5.

RF from BC is evaluated in different ways in the literature. The BC RF in this report is from fossil fuel and biofuel sources, while open burning sources are {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} separately to the biomass-burning aerosol, which also includes other organic species (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_2 Section 7.3.2}). BC can also affect clouds and surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} (see {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_2.7_5_2_3 Section 7.5.2.3} and {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}). Here we only isolate the fossil fuel and biofuel RFari attributable to BC over 1750–2010. Two comprehensive studies have quantified the BC RFari and derive different central estimates and uncertainty ranges. {cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013 Myhre et al. (2013)} quantify RF over 1850–2000 in the AeroCom II generation of models and scale these up using emissions to derive an RF estimate over 1750–2010 of +0.23 (+0.06 to +0.48) W m–2 for fossil fuel and biofuel emissions. {cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)} employ an observationally weighted scaling of an earlier generation of AeroCom models, regionally scaling BC absorption to match absorption AOD as retrieved at available AERONET sites. They derive a RF of +0.51 (+0.06 to +0.91) W m–2 for fossil fuel and biofuel sources. There are known biases in BC RF estimates from aerosol models. BC concentrations are underestimated near {Glossary.*Source source} regions, especially in Asia, but overestimated in remote regions and at altitude ({'Figure_7_15 Figure 7.15}). Models also probably underestimate the mass absorption cross-section probably because enhanced absorption due to internal mixing is insufficiently accounted for (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_3.7_3_3_2 Section 7.3.3.2}). Together these biases are expected to cause the modelled BC RF to be underestimated. The Bond et al. estimate accounted for these biases by scaling model results. However, there are a number of methodological difficulties associated with the absorption AOD retrieval from sunphotometer retrievals (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_3.7_3_3_2 Section 7.3.3.2}), the {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution attribution} of absorption AOD to BC, and the distribution and representativeness of AERONET stations for constraining global and relatively coarse-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} models. Absorption by OA (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_3 Section 7.3.3}), which may amount to 20% of fine-mode aerosol absorption ({cite.7.'Chung_et_al_2012}), is included into the BC RF estimate in Bond et al. but is now treated separately in most AeroCom II models, some of which have a global absorption AOD close to the Bond et al. estimate. We use our expert judgement here to adopt a BC RF estimate that is halfway between the two estimates and has a wider uncertainty range from combining distributions. This gives a BC RF estimate from fossil fuel and biofuel of +0.4 (+0.05 to +0.8) W m–2.

The AeroCom II estimate of the SOA RFari is –0.03 (–0.27 to –0.02) W m–2 and the primary OA from fossil fuel and biofuel estimate is –0.05 (–0.09 to –0.02) W m–2. An intercomparison of current chemistry–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} found two models outside of this range for SOA RFari, with one model exhibiting a significant positive {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} from land use and cover changes influencing biogenic emissions ({cite.7.'Shindell_et_al_2013}). We therefore adjust the upper end of the range to account for this, giving an SOA RFari estimate of –0.03 (–0.27 to +0.20) W m–2. Our assessment also scales the AeroComII estimate of the primary OA from fossil fuel and biofuel by 1.74 to –0.09 (–0.16 to –0.03) W m–2 to allow for the underestimate of emissions identified in {cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)}. For OA from natural burning, and for SOA, the natural radiative effects can be an order of magnitude larger than the RF (see Sections {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_2 7.3.2} and {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_4 7.3.4}, and O’Donnell et al., 2011) and they could thus contribute to climate {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_5 Section 7.3.5}).

The RFari from biomass burning includes both BC and OA species that contribute RFari of opposite sign, giving a net RFari close to zero ({cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013}; {cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013}). The AeroCom II models give a 1750– 2010 RFari of 0.00 (–0.08 to +0.07) W m–2, and an estimate of +0.0 (–0.2 to +0.2) W m–2 is adopted in this assessment, doubling the model uncertainty range to account for a probable underestimate of their emissions ({cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013}). Combining information in {cite.7.'Samset_et_al_2013 Samset et al. (2013)} and {cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013 Myhre et al. (2013)} would give a BC RFari contribution from biomass burning of slightly less than +0.1 W m–2 over 1850–2000 from the models. However, this ignores a significant contribution expected before 1850 and the probable underestimate in emissions. Our assessment therefore solely relies on {cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)}, giving an estimate of +0.2 (+0.03 to +0.4) W m–2 for the 1750–2010 BC contribution to the biomass burning RFari. This is a 50% larger forcing than the earlier generation of AeroCom models found ({cite.7.'Schulz_et_al_2006}). Note that we also expect an OA RFari of the same magnitude with opposite sign.

The AeroCom II RF estimate for nitrate aerosol gives an RFari of –0.11 (–0.17 to –0.03) W m–2, but comprises a relatively large 1850 to 1750 correction term. In these models ammonium aerosol is included within the sulphate and nitrate estimates. An intercomparison of current chemistry–climate models found an RF range of –0.41 to –0.03 W m–2 over 1850–2000. Some of the models with strong RF did not exhibit obvious biases, whereas others did ({cite.7.'Shindell_et_al_2013}). These sets of estimates are in good agreement with earlier estimates (e.g., {cite.7.'Adams_et_al_2001}; {cite.7.'Bauer_et_al_2007}; {cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2009}). Our assessment of the RFari from nitrate aerosol is –0.11 (–0.3 to –0.03) W m–2. This is based on AeroCom II with an increased lower bound.

{Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} sources of mineral aerosols can result from changes in land use and water use or climate change. Estimates of the RF from anthropogenic mineral aerosols are highly uncertain, because natural and anthropogenic sources of mineral aerosols are often located close to each other ({cite.7.'Mahowald_et_al_2009}; {cite.7.'Ginoux_et_al_2012b}). Using a compilation of observations of dust records over the 20th century with model simulations, {cite.7.'Mahowald_et_al_2010 Mahowald et al. (2010)} deduced a 1750–2000 change in mineral aerosol RFari including both natural and anthropogenic changes of –0.14 ± 0.11 W m–2. This is consistent within the AR4 estimate of –0.1 ± 0.2 W m–2 ({cite.7.'Forster_et_al_2007}) which is retained here. Note that part of the dust RF could be due to feedback processes (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_5 Section 7.3.5}).

Overall the species breakdown of RFari is less certain than the total RFari. Fossil fuel and biofuel emissions contribute to RFari via sulphate aerosol –0.4 (–0.6 to –0.2) W m–2; black carbon aerosol +0.4 (+0.05 to +0.8) W m–2; and primary and secondary {Glossary.*Organic_aerosol organic aerosol} –0.12 (–0.4 to +0.1) W m–2 (adding {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in quadrature). Additional RFari contributions are via biomass burning emissions, where black carbon and organic aerosol changes offset each other to give an estimate of +0.0 (–0.2 to +0.2) W m–2; nitrate aerosol –0.11 (–0.3 to –0.03) W m–2; and a contribution from mineral dust of –0.1 (–0.3 to +0.1) W m–2 that may not be entirely anthropogenic in origin. The sum of the RFari from these species agrees with, but is slightly weaker than, the best estimate of the better-constrained total RFari.
