index: hide
name: Activation and Differentiation of Helper T Cells

Helper T cells can only be activated by  **APCs** presenting processed  **foreign epitopes** in association with  **MHC II**. The first step in the activation process is  **TCR** recognition of the specific foreign epitope presented within the MHC II  **antigen-binding cleft**. The second step involves the interaction of  **CD4** on the helper T cell with a region of the MHC II molecule separate from the antigen-binding cleft. This second interaction anchors the MHC II-TCR complex and ensures that the helper T cell is recognizing both the foreign (“nonself”) epitope and “self” antigen of the APC; both recognitions are required for activation of the cell. In the third step, the APC and T cell secrete  **cytokines** that activate the helper T cell. The activated helper T cell then proliferates, dividing by mitosis to produce clonal naïve helper T cells that differentiate into subtypes with different functions ({'Figure_18_3_Tcellact Figure 18.3.Tcellact}).


{image:'Figure_18_3_Tcellact}
        

Activated helper T cells can differentiate into one of four distinct subtypes, summarized in . The differentiation process is directed by APC-secreted  **cytokines**. Depending on which APC-secreted cytokines interact with an activated helper T cell, the cell may differentiate into a T helper 1 (T<sub>H</sub>1) cell, a T helper 2 (T<sub>H</sub>2) cell, or a memory helper T cell. The two types of helper T cells are relatively short-lived  **effector cells**, meaning that they perform various functions of the immediate immune response. In contrast,  **memory helper T cells** are relatively long lived; they are programmed to “remember” a specific antigen or epitope in order to mount a rapid, strong,  **secondary response** to subsequent exposures.

 **TH1 cells** secrete their own cytokines that are involved in stimulating and orchestrating other cells involved in adaptive and innate immunity. For example, they stimulate cytotoxic T cells, enhancing their killing of infected cells and promoting differentiation into  **memory cytotoxic T cells**. T<sub>H</sub>1 cells also stimulate  **macrophages** and  **neutrophils** to become more effective in their killing of intracellular bacteria. They can also stimulate  **NK cells** to become more effective at killing target cells.

 **TH2 cells** play an important role in orchestrating the humoral immune response through their secretion of  **cytokines** that activate  **B cells** and direct B cell differentiation and  **antibody production**. Various cytokines produced by T<sub>H</sub>2 cells orchestrate  **antibody class switching**, which allows B cells to switch between the production of IgM, IgG, IgA, and IgE as needed to carry out specific antibody functions and to provide pathogen-specific humoral immune responses.

A third subtype of helper T cells called  **TH17 cells** was discovered through observations that immunity to some infections is not associated with T<sub>H</sub>1 or T<sub>H</sub>2 cells. T<sub>H</sub>17 cells and the cytokines they produce appear to be specifically responsible for the body’s defense against chronic mucocutaneous infections. Patients who lack sufficient T<sub>H</sub>17 cells in the mucosa (e.g., HIV patients) may be more susceptible to bacteremia and gastrointestinal infections.


****

| Subtype | Functions |
|:-:|:-:|
| T<sub>H</sub>1 cells | Stimulate cytotoxic T cells and produce memory cytotoxic T cells |
| Stimulate macrophages and neutrophils (PMNs) for more effective intracellular killing of pathogens |
| Stimulate NK cells to kill more effectively |
| T<sub>H</sub>2 cells | Stimulate B cell activation and differentiation into plasma cells and memory B cells |
| Direct antibody class switching in B cells |
| T<sub>H</sub>17 cells | Stimulate immunity to specific infections such as chronic mucocutaneous infections |
| Memory helper T cells | “Remember” a specific pathogen and mount a strong, rapid secondary response upon re-exposure |
    
