index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Immature T lymphocytes are produced in the red bone marrow and travel to the thymus for maturation.
  *  **Thymic selection** is a three-step process of negative and positive selection that determines which T cells will mature and exit the thymus into the peripheral bloodstream.
  *  **Central tolerance** involves negative selection of self-reactive T cells in the thymus, and  **peripheral tolerance** involves  **anergy** and  **regulatory T cells** that prevent self-reactive immune responses and autoimmunity.
  * The  **TCR** is similar in structure to immunoglobulins, but less complex. Millions of unique epitope-binding TCRs are encoded through a process of genetic rearrangement of V, D, and J gene segments.
  * T cells can be divided into three classes— **helper T cells, cytotoxic T cells,** and  **regulatory T cells—**based on their expression of CD4 or CD8, the MHC molecules with which they interact for activation, and their respective functions.
  * Activated helper T cells differentiate into  **TH1, TH2, TH17**, or  **memory T cell subtypes**. Differentiation is directed by the specific cytokines to which they are exposed. T<sub>H</sub>1, T<sub>H</sub>2, and T<sub>H</sub>17 perform different functions related to stimulation of adaptive and innate immune defenses. Memory T cells are long-lived cells that can respond quickly to secondary exposures.
  * Once activated, cytotoxic T cells target and kill cells infected with intracellular pathogens. Killing requires recognition of specific pathogen epitopes presented on the cell surface using MHC I molecules. Killing is mediated by  **perforin** and  **granzymes** that induce apoptosis.
  *  **Superantigens** are bacterial or viral proteins that cause a nonspecific activation of helper T cells, leading to an excessive release of cytokines ( **cytokine storm**) and a systemic, potentially fatal inflammatory response.
