index: hide
name: Classes of T Cells

T cells can be categorized into three distinct classes:  **helper T cells**, regulatory T cells, and  **cytotoxic T cells**. These classes are differentiated based on their expression of certain surface molecules, their mode of activation, and their functional roles in adaptive immunity ().

All T cells produce  **cluster of differentiation (CD) molecules**, cell surface glycoproteins that can be used to identify and distinguish between the various types of white blood cells. Although T cells can produce a variety of CD molecules,  **CD4** and  **CD8** are the two most important used for differentiation of the classes. Helper T cells and regulatory T cells are characterized by the expression of CD4 on their surface, whereas cytotoxic T cells are characterized by the expression of CD8.

Classes of T cells can also be distinguished by the specific MHC molecules and APCs with which they interact for activation. Helper T cells and regulatory T cells can only be activated by APCs presenting antigens associated with  **MHC II**. In contrast, cytotoxic T cells recognize antigens presented in association with  **MHC I**, either by APCs or by nucleated cells infected with an intracellular pathogen.

The different classes of T cells also play different functional roles in the immune system.  **Helper T cells** serve as the central orchestrators that help activate and direct functions of humoral and cellular immunity. In addition, helper T cells enhance the pathogen-killing functions of  **macrophages** and  **NK cells** of innate immunity. In contrast, the primary role of regulatory T cells is to prevent undesirable and potentially damaging immune responses. Their role in  **peripheral tolerance**, for example, protects against  **autoimmune disorders**, as discussed earlier. Finally,  **cytotoxic T cells** are the primary effector cells for cellular immunity. They recognize and target cells that have been infected by  **intracellular pathogens**, destroying infected cells along with the pathogens inside.


****

| Class | Surface CD Molecules | Activation | Functions |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Helper T cells | CD4 | APCs presenting antigens associated with MHC II | Orchestrate humoral and cellular immunity |
| Involved in the activation of macrophages and NK cells |
| Regulatory T cells | CD4 | APCs presenting antigens associated with MHC II | Involved in peripheral tolerance and prevention of autoimmune responses |
| Cytotoxic T cells | CD8 | APCs or infected nucleated cells presenting antigens associated with MHC I | Destroy cells infected with intracellular pathogens |
    
