index: hide
name: Activation and Differentiation of Cytotoxic T Cells

Cytotoxic T cells (also referred to as  **cytotoxic T lymphocytes**, or CTLs) are activated by APCs in a three-step process similar to that of helper T cells. The key difference is that the  **activation of cytotoxic T cells** involves recognition of an antigen presented with MHC I (as opposed to MHC II) and interaction of CD8 (as opposed to CD4) with the receptor complex. After the successful co-recognition of foreign epitope and self-antigen, the production of  **cytokines** by the APC and the cytotoxic T cell activate  **clonal proliferation** and differentiation. Activated cytotoxic T cells can differentiate into effector cytotoxic T cells that target pathogens for destruction or  **memory cells** that are ready to respond to subsequent exposures.

As noted, proliferation and differentiation of cytotoxic T cells is also stimulated by cytokines secreted from T<sub>H</sub>1 cells activated by the same foreign epitope. The  **co-stimulation** that comes from these T<sub>H</sub>1 cells is provided by secreted cytokines. Although it is possible for activation of cytotoxic T cells to occur without stimulation from T<sub>H</sub>1 cells, the activation is not as effective or long-lasting.

Once activated, cytotoxic T cells serve as the effector cells of cellular immunity, recognizing and kill cells infected with  **intracellular pathogens** through a mechanism very similar to that of  **NK cells**. However, whereas NK cells recognize nonspecific signals of cell stress or abnormality, cytotoxic T cells recognize infected cells through antigen presentation of pathogen-specific epitopes associated with  **MHC I**. Once an infected cell is recognized, the TCR of the cytotoxic T cell binds to the epitope and releases  **perforin** and  **granzymes** that destroy the infected cell ({'Figure_18_3_Tprolif Figure 18.3.Tprolif}). Perforin is a protein that creates pores in the target cell, and  **granzymes** are proteases that enter the pores and induce  **apoptosis**. This mechanism of  **programmed cell death** is a controlled and efficient means of destroying and removing infected cells without releasing the pathogens inside to infect neighboring cells, as might occur if the infected cells were simply lysed.


{image:'Figure_18_3_Tprolif}
        
