index: hide
name: Streptophytes

Until recently, all photosynthetic eukaryotes were considered members of the kingdom Plantae. The brown, red, and gold algae, however, have been reassigned to the Protista kingdom. This is because apart from their ability to capture light energy and fix CO<sub>2</sub>, they lack many structural and biochemical traits that distinguish plants from protists. The position of green algae is more ambiguous. Green algae contain the same carotenoids and chlorophyll  *a* and  *b* as land plants, whereas other algae have different accessory pigments and types of chlorophyll molecules in addition to chlorophyll  *a*. Both green algae and land plants also store carbohydrates as starch. Cells in green algae divide along cell plates called phragmoplasts, and their cell walls are layered in the same manner as the cell walls of embryophytes. Consequently, land plants and closely related green algae are now part of a new monophyletic group called  **Streptophyta**.

The remaining green algae, which belong to a group called Chlorophyta, include more than 7000 different species that live in fresh or brackish water, in seawater, or in snow patches. A few green algae even survive on soil, provided it is covered by a thin film of moisture in which they can live. Periodic dry spells provide a selective advantage to algae that can survive water stress. Some green algae may already be familiar, in particular  *Spirogyra* and desmids. Their cells contain chloroplasts that display a dizzying variety of shapes, and their cell walls contain cellulose, as do land plants. Some green algae are single cells, such as  *Chlorella* and *Chlamydomonas*, which adds to the ambiguity of green algae classification, because plants are multicellular. Other algae, like  *Ulva*(commonly called sea lettuce), form colonies ({'Figure_25_2_1abcd Figure 25.2.1abcd}).


{image:'Figure_25_2_1abcd}
        
