index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.7.3
title: 12.4.7.3 - Southern Ocean

A dominant and robust feature of the CMIP3 climate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} assessed in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} is the weaker surface warming at the end of the 21st century in the Southern Ocean area compared to the global mean. Furthermore, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) moves southward in most of the climate projections analysed in response to the simulated southward shift and strengthening of the SH mid-latitude westerlies ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}).

The additional analyses of the CMIP3 model output performed since the release of AR4 confirm and refine the earlier findings. The displacement and intensification of the mid-latitude westerlies contribute to a large warming between 40°S and 60°S from the surface to mid-depths ({cite.12.'Fyfe_et_al_2007}; Sen Gupta et al., 2009). Part of this warming has been {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to the southward translation of the Southern Ocean current system (Sen Gupta et al., 2009). Moreover, the wind changes influence the {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} through modifications of the latent and sensible heat fluxes and force a larger northward {Glossary.*Ekman_transport Ekman transport} of relatively cold polar surface water ({cite.12.'Screen_et_al_2010}). This also leads to a stronger upwelling that brings southward and upward relatively warm and salty deep water, resulting in a subsurface salinity increase at mid-depths south of 50°S (Sen Gupta et al., 2009; {cite.12.'Screen_et_al_2010}).

Overall, CMIP3 climate projections exhibit a decrease in mixed layer depth at southern midand high latitudes by the end of the 21st century. This feature is a consequence of the enhanced stratification resulting from surface warming and freshening ({cite.12.'Lefebvre_and_Goosse_2008}; Sen Gupta et al., 2009; {cite.12.'Capotondi_et_al_2012}). Despite large inter-model differences, there is a robust weakening of Antarctic Bottom Water production and its northward outflow, which is consistent with the decrease in surface density and is manifest as a warming signal close to the Antarctic margin that reaches abyssal depths (Sen Gupta et al., 2009).

In the vicinity of the Antarctic {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet}, CMIP3 models project an average warming of ~0.5C° at depths of 200–500 m in 2091–2100 compared to 1991–2000 for the SRES A1B scenario, which has the potential to impact the mass balance of ice shelves ({cite.12.'Yin_et_al_2011}). More detailed regional modelling using the SRES A1B scenario indicates that a redirection of the coastal current into the cavities underlying the Filchner-Ronne {Glossary.*Ice_shelf ice shelf} during the second half of the 21st century might enhance the average basal melting rate there from 0.2 m yr–1 to almost 4 m yr–1 ({cite.12.'Hellmer_et_al_2012}; see {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 Section 13.4.4.2}).

There are very few published analyses of CMIP5 climate projections focusing on the Southern Ocean. {cite.12.'Meijers_et_al_2012 Meijers et al. (2012)} found a wide variety of ACC responses to climate warming {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} across CMIP5 models. Models show a high correlation between the changes in ACC strength and position, with a southward (northward) shift of the ACC core as the ACC gets stronger (weaker). No clear relationship between future changes in wind stress and ACC strength was identified, while the weakening of the ACC transport simulated at the end of the 21st century by many models was found to correlate with the strong decrease in the surface heat and freshwater fluxes in the ACC {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} ({cite.12.'Meijers_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Downes_and_Hogg_2013}). In agreement with the CMIP3 assessment (Sen Gupta et al., 2009), subtropical gyres generally strengthen under RCP4.5 and {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} and all expand southward, inducing a southward shift of the northern boundary of the ACC at most longitudes in the majority of CMIP5 models ({cite.12.'Meijers_et_al_2012}). As in CMIP3 climate projections, an overall shallowing of the deep mixed layers that develop on the northern edge of the ACC in winter is observed, with larger shallowing simulated by models with deeper mixed layers during 1976–2005 (Sallée et al., 2013a). Sallée et al. (2013b) reported a warming of all mode, intermediate and deep water masses in the Southern Ocean. The largest temperature increase is found in mode and intermediate water layers. Consistently with CMIP3 projections ({cite.12.'Downes_et_al_2010}), these water layers experience a freshening, whereas bottom water becomes slightly saltier. Finally, Sallée et al. (2013b) noted an enhanced upwelling of circumpolar deep water and an increased {Glossary.*Subduction subduction} of intermediate water that are nearly balanced by interior processes (diapycnal fluxes).

A number of studies suggest that oceanic mesoscale eddies might influence the response of the Southern Ocean circulation, meridional heat transport and deep water formation to changes in wind stress and surface buoyancy flux (Böning et al., 2008; {cite.12.'Farneti_et_al_2010}; {cite.12.'Downes_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Farneti_and_Gent_2011}; {cite.12.'Saenko_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Spence_et_al_2012}). These eddies are not explicitly resolved in {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} and their role in future circulation changes still needs to be precisely quantified. Some of the CMIP5 models have output the meridional overturning due to the Eulerian mean circulation and that induced by parameterized eddies, thus providing a quantitative estimate of the role of the mesoscale circulation in a warming climate. On this basis, {cite.12.'Downes_and_Hogg_2013 Downes and Hogg (2013)} found that, under RCP8.5, the strengthening (weakening) of the upper (lower) Eulerian mean meridional overturning cell in the Southern Ocean is significantly correlated with the increased overlying wind stress and surface warming and is partly compensated at best by changes in eddy-induced overturning.

None of the CMIP3 and CMIP5 models include an interactive ice sheet component. When climate-ice sheet interactions are accounted for in an {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMIC} under a 4 × {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} scenario, the meltwater flux from the Antarctic ice sheet further reduces the surface density close to Antarctica and the rate of Antarctic Bottom Water formation. This ultimately results in a smaller surface warming at high southern latitudes compared to a simulation in which the freshwater flux from the melting ice sheet is not taken into account ({cite.12.'Swingedouw_et_al_2008}). Nevertheless, in this study, this effect becomes significant only after more than one century.
