index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.3.4.3
title: 6.3.4.3 - Global Nitrogen Budget

For base year 2010, {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} activities created ~210 (190 to 230) TgN of reactive nitrogen Nr from N2. This human-caused creation of reactive nitrogen in 2010 is at least 2 times larger than the rate of natural terrestrial creation of ~58 TgN (50 to 100 TgN yr–1) ({'Table_6_9 Table 6.9}, Section 1a). Note that the estimate of natural terrestrial biological fixation (58 TgN yr–1) is lower than former estimates (100 TgN yr–1, {cite.6.'Galloway_et_al_2004}), but the ranges overlap, 50 to 100 TgN yr–1, vs. 90 to 120 TgN yr–1, respectively). Of this created reactive nitrogen, NOx and NH3 {Topics.*Emissions emissions} from anthropogenic sources are about fourfold greater than natural emissions ({'Table_6_9 Table 6.9}, Section 1b). A greater portion of the NH3 emissions is deposited to the continents rather than to the oceans, relative to the deposition of NOy, due to the longer atmospheric residence time of the latter. These deposition estimates are lower limits, as they do not include organic nitrogen species. New model and measurement information ({cite.6.'Kanakidou_et_al_2012}) suggests that incomplete inclusion of emissions and atmospheric chemistry of reduced and oxidized organic nitrogen components in current models may lead to systematic underestimates of total global reactive {Glossary.*Nitrogen_deposition nitrogen deposition} by up to 35% ({'Table_6_9 Table 6.9}, Section 1c). Discharge of reactive nitrogen to the coastal oceans is ~45 TgN yr–1 ({'Table_6_9 Table 6.9}, Section 1d). Denitrification converts Nr back to atmospheric N2. The current estimate for the production of atmospheric N2 is 110 TgN yr–1 ({cite.6.'Bouwman_et_al_2013}). Thus of the ~280 TgN yr–1 of Nr from anthropogenic and natural sources, ~40% gets converted to N2 each year. The remaining 60% is stored in terrestrial ecosystems, transported by rivers and by atmospheric transport and deposition to the ocean, or emitted as {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O} (a small fraction of total Nr only despite the important {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} of increasing N2O emissions for climate change). For the oceans, denitrification producing atmospheric N2 is 200 to 400 TgN yr–1, which is larger than the current {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} of atmospheric N2 by ocean biological fixation of 140 to 177 TgN yr–1 ({'Table_6_9 Table 6.9} Section 1e; {'Figure_6_4 Figure 6.4}a).
