index: hide
name: Fungal Infections of the Reproductive System - Introduction

Only one major fungal pathogen affects the urogenital system.  **Candida** is a genus of fungi capable of existing in a yeast form or as a multicellular fungus.  *Candida* spp. are commonly found in the normal, healthy microbiota of the skin, gastrointestinal tract, respiratory system, and female urogenital tract ({'Figure_23_5_Candida Figure 23.5.Candida}). They can be pathogenic due to their ability to adhere to and invade host cells, form biofilms, secrete  **hydrolases** (e.g., proteases, phospholipases, and lipases) that assist in their spread through tissues, and change their phenotypes to protect themselves from the immune system. However, they typically only cause disease in the female reproductive tract under conditions that compromise the host’s defenses. While there are at least 20  *Candida* species of clinical importance,  *C. albicans* is the species most commonly responsible for fungal vaginitis.

As discussed earlier, lactobacilli in the vagina inhibit the growth of other organisms, including bacteria and  *Candida*, but disruptions can allow  *Candida* to increase in numbers. Typical disruptions include antibiotic therapy, illness (especially diabetes),  **pregnancy**, and the presence of transient microbes. Immunosuppression can also play a role, and the severe immunosuppression associated with HIV infection often allows  *Candida* to thrive. This can cause genital or vaginal  **candidiasis**, a condition characterized by vaginitis and commonly known as a  **yeast infection**. When a yeast infection develops, inflammation occurs along with symptoms of  **pruritus** (itching), a thick white or yellow discharge, and odor.

Other forms of candidiasis include cutaneous candidiasis (see <link:>) and oral thrush (see <link:>). Although  *Candida* spp. are found in the normal microbiota,  *Candida* spp. may also be transmitted between individuals. Sexual contact is a common mode of transmission, although candidiasis is not considered an STI.

Diagnosis of vaginal candidiasis can be made using microscopic evaluation of vaginal secretions to determine whether there is an excess of  *Candida*. Culturing approaches are less useful because  *Candida* is part of the normal microbiota and will regularly appear. It is also easy to contaminate samples with  *Candida* because it is so common, so care must be taken to handle clinical material appropriately. Samples can be refrigerated if there is a delay in handling.  *Candida* is a dimorphic fungus, so it does not only exist in a yeast form; cultivation can be used to identify chlamydospores and pseudohyphae, which develop from germ tubes ({'Figure_23_5_GermTubes Figure 23.5.GermTubes}). The presence of the  **germ tube** can be used in a diagnostic test in which cultured yeast cells are combined with rabbit serum and observed after a few hours for the presence of germ tubes. Molecular tests are also available if needed. The  **Affirm VPII Microbial Identification Test**, for instance, tests simultaneously for the vaginal microbes  *C. albicans*,  *G. vaginalis* (see <link:>), and  *Trichomonas vaginalis* (see <link:>).

Topical antifungal medications for vaginal candidiasis include  **butoconazole**,  **miconazole**,  **clotrimazole**,  **tioconazole**, and  **nystatin**. Oral treatment with  **fluconazole** can be used. There are often no clear precipitating factors for infection, so prevention is difficult.


{image:'Figure_23_5_Candida}
        


{image:'Figure_23_5_GermTubes}
        
