index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 14.8.8
title: 14.8.8 - Central and North Asia

This area mostly covering the interior of a large continent extending from the Tibetan plateau to the Arctic is mainly influenced by weather systems coming from the west or south, giving some dependency on the AAM ({Chapters.14.14_2.14_2_2 Section 14.2.2}) on the one hand and {Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation NAO}/{Glossary.*Northern_Annular_Mode NAM} ({Chapters.14.14_5.14_5_1 Section 14.5.1}) on the other, with associated atmospheric {Glossary.*Blocking blocking} as an additional phenomenon of influence related to the latter ({Box_14_2 Box 14.2}). In particular, the variability and long-term change of the climate system in central Asia and northern Asia are closely related to variations of the NAO and NAM ({cite.14.'Takaya_and_Nakamura_2005}; {cite.14.'Knutson_et_al_2006}; {cite.14.'Popova_and_Shmakin_2010}; {cite.14.'Sung_et_al_2010}; {'Table_14_3 Table 14.3}).

As a part of the polar amplification, large warming trends in recent decades are observed in the northern Asian sector (e.g., {'Figure_2_22 Figure 2.22}). The warming {Glossary.*Trend trend} was particularly strong in the cold season (November to March), with an increase of 2.4°C per 50 years in the mid-latitude semi-arid area of Asia, where the annual rainfall is within the range of 200 to 600 mm over the period of 1901–2009 ({cite.14.'Huang_et_al_2012}). The observations indicate some increasing trends of heavy precipitation events in northern Asia, but no spatially coherent trends in central Asia ({cite.14.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}).

The CMIP5 models generally have difficulties in representing the mean climate expressed as the climatological means of both temperature and precipitation ({'Table_14_2 Table 14.2}) for the sub-regions represented in this area, which is partly related to the poor {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} unable to resolve the complex mountainous terrain dominating this {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}. But the scarceness of observational data and issues related to how these best can be compared with coarse resolution models adds to the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} regarding model quality.

The model {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} presented in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} (Section 11.4) indicated strong warming in northern Asia during winter and in central Asia during summer. Precipitation was projected to increase throughout the year in northern Asia with the largest fractional increase during winter. For central Asia, a majority of the CMIP3 models projected decreasing precipitation during spring and summer. {cite.14.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012 Seneviratne et al. (2012)} indicate increases in all precipitation extreme indices for northern Asia and in the 20-year {Glossary.*Return_value return value} of annual maximum daily precipitation for central Asia. These projections are supported by output from CMIP5 models subject to various RCP {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} (see Annex I). CMIP5 projected temperature increase in Central Asia of comparable magnitude in both JJA and in DJF. In North Asia, temperatures rise more in DJF than in JJA, while less annual variation is found over Central Asia and the Tibetan Plateau ({'Table_14_1 Table 14.1}, Figures AI.12 to AI.13, AI.52 to AI.55 and AI.56 to AI.57).

With an {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model RCM} {cite.14.'Sato_et_al_2007 Sato et al. (2007)} projected precipitation decreases over northern Mongolia and increases over southern Mongolia in July. {Glossary.*Soil_moisture Soil moisture} over Mongolia decreases in July as a result of the combined effect of decreased precipitation and increased potential evaporation due to rising {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}. In North Asia, all CMIP5 models projects an increase in precipitation in the winter half year, and summer half year precipitation is also projected to increase ({'Table_14_1 Table 14.1}; Figures AI.14 to AI.15). In Central Asia and the Tibetan Plateau, model agreement is lower on changes both for winter and summer precipitation ({'Figure_14_24 Figure 14.24}; {'Table_14_1 Table 14.1}; Figures AI.54 to AI.55 and AI.58 to AI.59). The ability of these CMIP5 models to simulate precipitation over this region varies ({'Table_14_3 Table 14.3}). The reasonable level of agreement in projections of precipitation to be positive and significantly above the 20-year natural variability ({'Table_14_2 Table 14.2}), and therefore suggests that confidence in the sign of the projected change in future precipitation is medium.

In summary, all the areas are projected to warm, a stronger than global mean warming trend is projected for northern Asia during winter. For central Asia, warming magnitude is similar between winter and summer. Precipitation in northern Asia will very likely increase, whereas the precipitation over central Asia is likely to increase. Extreme precipitation events will likely increase in both regions.
