index: hide
name: Transplant Rejection

The different types of grafts described above have varying risks for rejection (). Rejection occurs when the recipient’s immune system recognizes the donor tissue as foreign (non-self), triggering an immune response. The  **major histocompatibility complex markers** **MHC I** and  **MHC II**, more specifically identified as  **human leukocyte antigens (HLAs)**, play a role in transplant rejection. The HLAs expressed in tissue transplanted from a genetically different individual or species may be recognized as non-self molecules by the host’s  **dendritic cells**. If this occurs, the dendritic cells will process and present the foreign HLAs to the host’s helper T cells and cytotoxic T cells, thereby activating them. Cytotoxic T cells then target and kill the grafted cells through the same mechanism they use to kill virus-infected cells; helper T cells may also release cytokines that activate macrophages to kill graft cells.


****

| Graft | Procedure | Complications |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Autograft | From self to self | No rejection concerns |
| Isograft | From identical twin to twin | Little concern of rejection |
| Allograft | From relative or nonrelative to individual | Rejection possible |
| Xenograft | From animal to human | Rejection possible |
    

With the three highly polymorphic MHC I genes in humans ( *HLA-A*,  *HLA-B*, and  *HLA-C*) determining compatibility, each with many alleles segregating in a population, odds are extremely low that a randomly chosen donor will match a recipient's six-allele genotype (the two alleles at each locus are expressed codominantly). This is why a parent or a sibling may be the best donor in many situations—a genetic match between the MHC genes is much more likely and the organ is much less likely to be rejected.

Although matching all of the MHC genes can lower the risk for rejection, there are a number of additional gene products that also play a role in stimulating responses against grafted tissue. Because of this, no non-self grafted tissue is likely to completely avoid rejection. However, the more similar the MHC gene match, the more likely the graft is to be tolerated for a longer time. Most transplant recipients, even those with tissues well matched to their MHC genes, require treatment with  **immunosuppressant drug**s for the rest of their lives. This can make them more vulnerable than the general population to complications from infectious diseases. It can also result in transplant-related malignancies because the body’s normal defenses against  **cancer** cells are being suppressed.
