index: hide
name: Prokaryotic Gene Regulation

In bacteria and  **archaea**, structural proteins with related functions are usually encoded together within the genome in a block called an  **operon** and are transcribed together under the control of a single  **promoter**, resulting in the formation of a polycistronic transcript ({'Figure_11_7_Operon Figure 11.7.Operon}). In this way, regulation of the transcription of all of the structural genes encoding the enzymes that catalyze the many steps in a single biochemical pathway can be controlled simultaneously, because they will either all be needed at the same time, or none will be needed. For example, in  **E. coli**, all of the structural genes that encode enzymes needed to use lactose as an energy source lie next to each other in the lactose (or  *lac*) operon under the control of a single promoter, the  *lac* promoter. French scientists François  **Jacob** (1920–2013) and Jacques  **Monod** at the Pasteur Institute were the first to show the organization of bacterial genes into operons, through their studies on the  **lac operon** of  *E. coli*. For this work, they won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1965. Although eukaryotic genes are not organized into operons, prokaryotic operons are excellent models for learning about gene regulation generally. There are some gene clusters in eukaryotes that function similar to operons. Many of the principles can be applied to eukaryotic systems and contribute to our understanding of changes in gene expression in eukaryotes that can result pathological changes such as cancer.

Each operon includes DNA sequences that influence its own transcription; these are located in a region called the regulatory region. The regulatory region includes the promoter and the region surrounding the promoter, to which  **transcription factors**, proteins encoded by regulatory genes, can bind. Transcription factors influence the binding of  **RNA polymerase** to the promoter and allow its progression to transcribe structural genes. A  **repressor** is a transcription factor that suppresses transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by binding to a DNA sequence within the regulatory region called the  **operator**, which is located between the RNA polymerase binding site of the promoter and the transcriptional start site of the first structural gene. Repressor binding physically blocks RNA polymerase from transcribing structural genes. Conversely, an  **activator** is a transcription factor that increases the transcription of a gene in response to an external stimulus by facilitating RNA polymerase binding to the promoter. An  **inducer**, a third type of regulatory molecule, is a small molecule that either activates or represses transcription by interacting with a repressor or an activator.

In prokaryotes, there are examples of operons whose gene products are required rather consistently and whose expression, therefore, is unregulated. Such operons are  **constitutively expressed**, meaning they are transcribed and translated continuously to provide the cell with constant intermediate levels of the protein products. Such genes encode enzymes involved in housekeeping functions required for cellular maintenance, including DNA replication, repair, and expression, as well as enzymes involved in core metabolism. In contrast, there are other prokaryotic operons that are expressed only when needed and are regulated by repressors, activators, and inducers.


{image:'Figure_11_7_Operon}
        
