index: hide
name: Regulation by Repression

Prokaryotic operons are commonly controlled by the binding of repressors to operator regions, thereby preventing the transcription of the structural genes. Such operons are classified as either  **repressible operon** **s** or inducible operons. Repressible operons, like the tryptophan ( *trp*) operon, typically contain genes encoding enzymes required for a biosynthetic pathway. As long as the product of the pathway, like tryptophan, continues to be required by the cell, a repressible operon will continue to be expressed. However, when the product of the biosynthetic pathway begins to accumulate in the cell, removing the need for the cell to continue to make more, the expression of the operon is repressed. Conversely,  **inducible operon** **s**, like the  **lac operon** of  **E. coli**, often contain genes encoding enzymes in a pathway involved in the metabolism of a specific substrate like lactose. These enzymes are only required when that substrate is available, thus expression of the operons is typically induced only in the presence of the substrate.

## The  *trp* Operon: A Repressible Operon

 **E. coli** can synthesize tryptophan using enzymes that are encoded by five structural genes located next to each other in the  **trp operon** ({'Figure_11_7_trp Figure 11.7.trp}). When environmental tryptophan is low, the operon is turned on. This means that transcription is initiated, the genes are expressed, and tryptophan is synthesized. However, if tryptophan is present in the environment, the  *trp* operon is turned off. Transcription does not occur and tryptophan is not synthesized.

When tryptophan is not present in the cell, the repressor by itself does not bind to the operator; therefore, the operon is active and tryptophan is synthesized. However, when tryptophan accumulates in the cell, two tryptophan molecules bind to the  *trp* repressor molecule, which changes its shape, allowing it to bind to the  *trp* operator. This binding of the active form of the  *trp* repressor to the operator blocks RNA polymerase from transcribing the structural genes, stopping expression of the operon. Thus, the actual product of the biosynthetic pathway controlled by the operon regulates the expression of the operon.


{image:'Figure_11_7_trp}
        

## The  *lac* Operon: An Inducible Operon

The  **lac operon** is an example of an inducible operon that is also subject to activation in the absence of glucose ({'Figure_11_7_lacrep Figure 11.7.lacrep}). The  *lac* operon encodes three structural genes necessary to acquire and process the disaccharide lactose from the environment, breaking it down into the simple sugars glucose and galactose. For the  *lac* operon to be expressed, lactose must be present. This makes sense for the cell because it would be energetically wasteful to create the enzymes to process lactose if lactose was not available.

In the absence of lactose, the  *lac* repressor is bound to the operator region of the  *lac* operon, physically preventing RNA polymerase from transcribing the structural genes. However, when lactose is present, the lactose inside the cell is converted to allolactose. Allolactose serves as an  **inducer** molecule, binding to the  **repressor** and changing its shape so that it is no longer able to bind to the operator DNA. Removal of the repressor in the presence of lactose allows  **RNA polymerase** to move through the operator region and begin transcription of the  *lac* structural genes.


{image:'Figure_11_7_lacrep}
        

## The  *lac* Operon: Activation by Catabolite Activator Protein

Bacteria typically have the ability to use a variety of substrates as carbon sources. However, because glucose is usually preferable to other substrates, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that alternative substrates are only used when glucose has been depleted. Additionally, bacteria have mechanisms to ensure that the genes encoding enzymes for using alternative substrates are expressed only when the alternative substrate is available. In the 1940s, Jacques  **Monod** was the first to demonstrate the preference for certain substrates over others through his studies of  *E. coli*’s growth when cultured in the presence of two different substrates simultaneously. Such studies generated diauxic growth curves, like the one shown in {'Figure_11_7_Diaux Figure 11.7.Diaux}. Although the preferred substrate glucose is used first,  **E. coli** grows quickly and the enzymes for lactose metabolism are absent. However, once glucose levels are depleted, growth rates slow, inducing the expression of the enzymes needed for the metabolism of the second substrate, lactose. Notice how the growth rate in lactose is slower, as indicated by the lower steepness of the growth curve.

The ability to switch from glucose use to another substrate like lactose is a consequence of the activity of an enzyme called  **Enzyme IIA** (EIIA). When glucose levels drop, cells produce less ATP from catabolism (see <link:>), and EIIA becomes phosphorylated. Phosphorylated EIIA activates adenylyl cyclase, an enzyme that converts some of the remaining ATP to  **cyclic AMP (cAMP)**, a cyclic derivative of AMP and important signaling molecule involved in glucose and energy metabolism in  *E. coli*. As a result, cAMP levels begin to rise in the cell ({'Figure_11_7_ATPcAMP Figure 11.7.ATPcAMP}).

The  *lac* operon also plays a role in this switch from using glucose to using lactose. When glucose is scarce, the accumulating cAMP caused by increased adenylyl cyclase activity binds to  **catabolite activator protein (CAP)**, also known as cAMP receptor protein (CRP). The complex binds to the promoter region of the  *lac* operon ({'Figure_11_7_CAP Figure 11.7.CAP}). In the regulatory regions of these operons, a CAP binding site is located upstream of the RNA polymerase binding site in the promoter. Binding of the CAP-cAMP complex to this site increases the binding ability of RNA polymerase to the promoter region to initiate the transcription of the structural genes. Thus, in the case of the  *lac* operon, for transcription to occur, lactose must be present (removing the lac repressor protein) and glucose levels must be depleted (allowing binding of an activating protein). When glucose levels are high, there is catabolite repression of operons encoding enzymes for the metabolism of alternative substrates. Because of low cAMP levels under these conditions, there is an insufficient amount of the CAP-cAMP complex to activate transcription of these operons. See  for a summary of the regulation of the lac operon.


{image:'Figure_11_7_Diaux}
        


{image:'Figure_11_7_ATPcAMP}
        


{image:'Figure_11_7_CAP}
        


****

| Glucose | CAP binds | Lactose | Repressor binds | Transcription |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| + | – | – | + | No |
| + | – | + | – | Some |
| – | + | – | + | No |
| – | + | + | – | Yes |
    
