index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Gene expression** is a tightly regulated process.
  * Gene expression in prokaryotes is largely regulated at the point of transcription. Gene expression in eukaryotes is additionally regulated post-transcriptionally.
  * Prokaryotic structural genes of related function are often organized into  **operons**, all controlled by transcription from a single promoter. The regulatory region of an operon includes the promoter itself and the region surrounding the promoter to which transcription factors can bind to influence transcription.
  * Although some operons are  **constitutively expressed**, most are subject to regulation through the use of  **transcription factors** (repressors and activators). A  **repressor** binds to an  **operator**, a DNA sequence within the regulatory region between the RNA polymerase binding site in the promoter and first structural gene, thereby physically blocking transcription of these operons. An  **activator** binds within the regulatory region of an operon, helping RNA polymerase bind to the promoter, thereby enhancing the transcription of this operon. An  **inducer** influences transcription through interacting with a repressor or activator.
  * The  *trp* operon is a classic example of a  **repressible operon**. When tryptophan accumulates, tryptophan binds to a repressor, which then binds to the operator, preventing further transcription.
  * The  *lac* operon is a classic example an  **inducible operon**. When lactose is present in the cell, it is converted to allolactose. Allolactose acts as an inducer, binding to the repressor and preventing the repressor from binding to the operator. This allows transcription of the structural genes.
  * The  *lac* operon is also subject to activation. When glucose levels are depleted, some cellular ATP is converted into cAMP, which binds to the  **catabolite activator protein (CAP)**. The cAMP-CAP complex activates transcription of the  *lac* operon. When glucose levels are high, its presence prevents transcription of the  *lac* operon and other operons by  **catabolite repression**.
  * Small intracellular molecules called  **alarmones** are made in response to various environmental stresses, allowing bacteria to control the transcription of a group of operons, called a regulon.
  * Bacteria have the ability to change which  **σ factor** of RNA polymerase they use in response to environmental conditions to quickly and globally change which regulons are transcribed.
  * Prokaryotes have regulatory mechanisms, including  **attenuation** and the use of  **riboswitches**, to simultaneously control the completion of transcription and translation from that transcript. These mechanisms work through the formation of stem loops in the 5’ end of an mRNA molecule currently being synthesized.
  * There are additional points of regulation of gene expression in prokaryotes and eukaryotes. In eukaryotes,  **epigenetic regulation** by chemical modification of DNA or histones, and regulation of RNA processing are two methods.
