index: hide
name: Additional Methods of Regulation in Bacteria: Attenuation and Riboswitches

Although most gene expression is regulated at the level of transcription initiation in prokaryotes, there are also mechanisms to control both the completion of transcription as well as translation concurrently. Since their discovery, these mechanisms have been shown to control the completion of transcription and translation of many prokaryotic operons. Because these mechanisms link the regulation of transcription and translation directly, they are specific to prokaryotes, because these processes are physically separated in eukaryotes.

One such regulatory system is  **attenuation**, whereby secondary  **stem-loop structure**s formed within the 5’ end of an mRNA being transcribed determine if transcription to complete the synthesis of this mRNA will occur and if this mRNA will be used for translation. Beyond the transcriptional repression mechanism already discussed, attenuation also controls expression of the  **trp operon** in  **E. coli** ({'Figure_11_7_Atten Figure 11.7.Atten}). The  *trp* operon regulatory region contains a leader sequence called  *trpL* between the operator and the first structural gene, which has four stretches of RNA that can base pair with each other in different combinations. When a terminator stem-loop forms, transcription terminates, releasing RNA polymerase from the mRNA. However, when an antiterminator stem-loop forms, this prevents the formation of the terminator stem-loop, so RNA polymerase can transcribe the structural genes.

A related mechanism of concurrent regulation of transcription and translation in prokaryotes is the use of a  **riboswitch**, a small region of noncoding RNA found within the 5’ end of some prokaryotic mRNA molecules ({'Figure_11_7_Riboswitch Figure 11.7.Riboswitch}. A riboswitch may bind to a small intracellular molecule to stabilize certain secondary structures of the mRNA molecule. The binding of the small molecule determines which stem-loop structure forms, thus influencing the completion of mRNA synthesis and protein synthesis.


{image:'Figure_11_7_Atten}
        


{image:'Figure_11_7_Riboswitch}
        
