index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.6.2
title: 10.6.2 - Attribution of Weather and Climate Events

Since many of the impacts of climate change are likely to manifest themselves through {Topics.*Extreme_Events extreme weather}, there is increasing interest in quantifying the role of human and other external influences on climate in specific weather events. This presents particular challenges for both science and the communication of results. It has so far been attempted for a relatively small number of specific events (e.g., {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2004}; {cite.10.'Pall_et_al_2011}) although {cite.10.'Peterson_et_al_2012 Peterson et al. (2012)} attempt, for the first time, a coordinated assessment to place different high-impact weather events of the previous year in a climate perspective. In this assessment, selected studies are used to illustrate the essential principles of event {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution attribution}: see {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2013 Stott et al. (2013)} for a more exhaustive review.

Two distinct ways have emerged of framing the question of how an external climate driver like increased GHG levels may have contributed to an observed weather event. First, the ‘attributable risk’ approach considers the event as a whole, and asks how the external driver may have increased or decreased the probability of occurrence of an event of comparable magnitude. Second, the ‘attributable magnitude’ approach considers how different external factors contributed to the event or, more specifically, how the external driver may have increased the magnitude of an event of comparable occurrence probability. {cite.10.'Hoerling_et_al_2013 Hoerling et al. (2013)} uses both methods to infer changes in magnitude and {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} of the 2011 Texas {Glossary.*Heat_wave heat wave}.

Quantifying the absolute risk or probability of an {Glossary.*Extreme_weather_event extreme weather event} in the absence of {Topics.*Human_Influence human influence} on climate is particularly challenging. Many of the most extreme events occur because a self-reinforcing process that occurs only under extreme conditions amplifies an initial anomaly (e.g., {cite.10.'Fischer_et_al_2007}). Hence the probability of occurrence of such events cannot, in general, be estimated simply by extrapolating from the distribution of less extreme events that are sampled in the historical record. {Glossary.*Proxy Proxy} records of pre-industrial climate generally do not resolve high-frequency weather, so inferring changes in probabilities requires a combination of hard-to-test distributional assumptions and extreme value theory. Quantifying absolute probabilities with {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} is also difficult because of known biases in their simulation of extreme events. Hence, with only a couple of exceptions (e.g., {cite.10.'Hansen_et_al_2012}), studies have focussed on how risks have changed or how different factors have contributed to an observed event, rather than claiming that the absolute probability of occurrence of that event would have been extremely low in the absence of human influence on climate.

Even without considering absolute probabilities, there remain considerable {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in quantifying changes in probabilities. The assessment of such changes will depend on the selected indicator, time period and spatial scale on which the event is analysed, and the way in which the event-attribution question is framed can substantially affect apparent conclusions . If an event occurs in the tail of the distribution, then a small shift in the distribution as a whole can result in a large increase in the probability of an event of a given magnitude: hence it is possible for the same event to be both ‘mostly natural’ in terms of attributable magnitude (if the shift in the distribution due to human influence is small compared to the anomaly in the natural variability that was the primary cause) and ‘mostly anthropogenic’ in terms of attributable risk (if human influence has increased its probability of occurrence by more than a factor of 2). These issues are discussed further using the example of the 2010 Russian heat wave below.

The majority of studies have focussed on quantifying attributable risk. Formally, risk is a function of both hazard and vulnerability ({cite.10.'IPCC_2012}), although most studies attempting to quantify risk in the context of extreme weather do not explicitly use this definition, which is discussed further in Chapter 19 of WGII, but use the term as a shorthand for the probability of the occurrence of an event of a given magnitude. Any assessment of change in risk depends on an assumption of ‘all other things being equal’, including natural drivers of climate change and vulnerability. Given this assumption, the change in hazard is proportional to the change in risk, so we will follow the published literature and continue to refer to Fraction Attributable Risk, defined as {cite.1.'IPCC_1990 FAR} = 1 – P0/P1, P0 being the probability of an event occurring in the absence of human influence on climate, and P1 the corresponding probability in a world in which human influence is included. FAR is thus the fraction of the risk that is attributable to human influence (or, potentially, any other external driver of climate change) and does not require knowledge of absolute values of P0 and P1, only their ratio.

For individual events with return times greater than the time scale over which the signal of human influence is emerging (30 to 50 years, meaning P0 and P1 less than 2 to 3% in any given year), it is impossible to observe a change in occurrence frequency directly because of the shortness of the observed record, so attribution is necessarily a multi-step procedure. Either a {Glossary.*Trend trend} in occurrence frequency of more frequent events is {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to human influence and a statistical model is then used to extrapolate to the implications for P0 and P1; or an attributable trend is identified in some other variable, such as {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature}, and a physically based weather model is used to assess the implications for extreme weather risk. Neither approach is free of assumptions: no atmospheric model is perfect, but statistical extrapolation may also be misleading for reasons given above.

{cite.10.'Pall_et_al_2011 Pall et al. (2011)} provide an example of multi-step assessment of attributable risk using a physically based model, applied to the floods that occurred in the UK in the autumn of 2000, the wettest autumn to have occurred in England and Wales since records began. To assess the contribution of the anthropogenic increase in {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} to the risk of these floods, a several thousand member {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of atmospheric models with realistic atmospheric composition, {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} and {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} boundary conditions imposed was compared with a second ensemble with composition and {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} and sea ice boundary conditions modified to simulate conditions that would have occurred had there been no anthropogenic increase in GHGs since 1900. Simulated daily precipitation from these two ensembles was fed into an empirical rainfall-{Glossary.*Runoff runoff} model and daily England and Wales runoff used as a proxy for flood risk. Results ({'Figure_10_18 Figure 10.18}a) show that including the influence of anthropogenic greenhouse warming increases flood risk at the threshold relevant to autumn 2000 by around a factor of two in the majority of cases, but with a broad range of uncertainty: in 10% of cases the increase in risk is less than 20%.

{image:'Figure_10_18}

{cite.10.'Kay_et_al_2011a Kay et al. (2011a)}, analysing the same ensembles but using a more sophisticated hydrological model found a reduction in the risk of snow melt–induced flooding in the spring season ({'Figure_10_18 Figure 10.18}b) which, aggregated over the entire year, largely compensated for the increased risk of precipitation-induced flooding in autumn. This illustrates an important general point: even if a particular flood event may have been made more likely by human influence on climate, there is no certainty that all kinds of flood events in that location, country or {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} have been made more likely.

{cite.10.'Rahmstorf_and_Coumou_2011 Rahmstorf and Coumou (2011)} provide an example of an empirical approach to the estimation of attributable risk applied to the 2010 Russian heat wave. They fit a nonlinear trend to central Russian temperatures and show that the warming that has occurred in this region since the 1960s has increased the risk of a heat wave of the magnitude observed in 2010 by around a factor of 5, corresponding to an FAR of 0.8. They do not address what has caused the trend since 1960, although they note that other studies have attributed most of the large-scale warming over this period to the anthropogenic increase in GHG concentrations.

{cite.10.'Dole_et_al_2011 Dole et al. (2011)} take a different approach to the 2010 Russian heat wave, focussing on attributable magnitude, analysing contributions from various external factors, and conclude that this event was ‘mainly natural in origin’. First, observations show no evidence of a trend in occurrence frequency of hot Julys in western Russia, and despite the warming that has occurred since the 1960s, mean July temperatures in that region actually display a (statistically insignificant) cooling trend over the century as a whole, in contrast to the case for central and southern European summer temperatures ({cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2004}). Members of the CMIP3 multi-model ensemble likewise show no evidence of a trend towards warming summers in central Russia. Second, {cite.10.'Dole_et_al_2011 Dole et al. (2011)} note that the 2010 Russian event was associated with a strong {Glossary.*Blocking blocking} atmospheric flow anomaly, and even the complete 2010 boundary conditions are insufficient to increase the probability of a prolonged blocking event in this region, in contrast again to the situation in Europe in 2003. This anomaly in the large-scale atmospheric flow led to low-pressure systems being redirected around the blocking over Russia causing severe flooding in Pakistan which could so far not be attributed to anthropogenic causes (van Oldenborgh et al., 2012), highlighting that a global perspective is necessary to unravel the different factors influencing individual extreme events ({cite.10.'Trenberth_and_Fasullo_2012}).

{cite.10.'Otto_et_al_2012 Otto et al. (2012)} argue that it is possible to reconcile the results of {cite.10.'Rahmstorf_and_Coumou_2011 Rahmstorf and Coumou (2011)} with those of {cite.10.'Dole_et_al_2011 Dole et al. (2011)} by relating the attributable risk and attributable magnitude approaches to framing the event attribution question. This is illustrated in {'Figure_10_18 Figure 10.18}c, which shows return times of July temperatures in western Russia in a large ensemble of atmospheric model simulations for the 1960s (in green) and 2000s (in blue). The threshold exceeded in 2010 is shown by the solid horizontal line which is almost 6°C above 1960s mean July temperatures, shown by the dashed line. The difference between the green and blue lines could be characterized as a 1.5°C increase in the magnitude of a 30-year event (the vertical red arrow, which is substantially smaller than the size of the anomaly itself, supporting the assertion that the event was ‘mainly natural’ in terms of attributable magnitude. Alternatively, it could be characterized as a threefold increase in the risk of the 2010 threshold being exceeded, supporting the assertion that risk of the event occurring was mainly attributable to the external trend, consistent with {cite.10.'Rahmstorf_and_Coumou_2011 Rahmstorf and Coumou (2011)}. {cite.10.'Rupp_et_al_2012 Rupp et al. (2012)} and {cite.10.'Hoerling_et_al_2013 Hoerling et al. (2013)} reach similar conclusions about the 2011 Texas heat wave, both noting the importance of {Glossary.*La_Nin_a La Niña} conditions in the Pacific, with anthropogenic warming making a relatively small contribution to the magnitude of the event, but a more substantial contribution to the risk of temperatures exceeding a high threshold. This shows that the quantification of attributable risks and and changes in magnitude are affected by modelling error (e.g., {cite.10.'Visser_and_Petersen_2012}) as they depend on the atmospheric model’s ability to simulate the observed anomalies in the {Glossary.*General_circulation general circulation} ({Chapters.9 Chapter 9}).

Because much of the magnitude of these two heat waves is attributable to atmospheric flow anomalies, any evidence of a causal link between rising GHGs and the occurrence or persistence of flow anomalies such as blocking would have a very substantial impact on attribution claims. {cite.10.'Pall_et_al_2011 Pall et al. (2011)} argue that, although flow anomalies played a substantial role in the autumn 2000 floods in the UK, thermodynamic mechanisms were primarily responsible for the change in risk between their ensembles. Regardless of whether the statistics of flow regimes themselves have changed, observed temperatures in recent years in Europe are distinctly warmer than would be expected for analogous atmospheric flow regimes in the past, affecting both warm and cold extremes ({cite.10.'Yiou_et_al_2007}; {cite.10.'Cattiaux_et_al_2010}).

In summary, increasing numbers of studies are finding that the probability of occurrence of events associated with extremely high temperatures has increased substantially due to the large-scale warming since the mid-20th century. Because most of this large-scale warming is very likely due to the increase in atmospheric GHG concentrations, it is possible to attribute, via a multi-step procedure, some of the increase in probability of these regional events to human influence on climate. Such an increase in probability is consistent with the implications of single-step attribution studies looking at the overall implications of increasing mean temperatures for the probabilities of exceeding temperature thresholds in some regions. We conclude that it is likely that human influence has substantially increased the probability of occurrence of heat waves in some locations. It is expected that attributable risks for extreme precipitation events are generally smaller and more uncertain, consistent with the findings in {cite.10.'Kay_et_al_2011a Kay et al. (2011a)} and {cite.10.'Pall_et_al_2011 Pall et al. (2011)}. The science of event attribution is still confined to case studies, often using a single model, and typically focussing on high-impact events for which the issue of human influence has already arisen. While the increasing risk of heat waves measured as the occurrence of a previous temperature record being exceeded can simply be explained by natural variability superimposed by globally increasing temperature, conclusions for holistic events including general circulation patterns are specific to the events that have been considered so far and rely on the representation of relevant processes in the model.

{Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} warming remains a relatively small contributor to the overall magnitude of any individual short-term event because its magnitude is small relative to natural random weather variability on short time scales ({cite.10.'Dole_et_al_2011}; {cite.10.'Hoerling_et_al_2013}). Because of this random variability, weather events continue to occur that have been made less likely by human influence on climate, such as extreme winter cold events ({cite.10.'Massey_et_al_2012}), or whose probability of occurrence has not been significantly affected either way. Quantifying how different external factors contribute to current risks, and how risks are changing, is possible with much higher confidence than quantifying absolute risk. Biases in climate models, uncertainty in the probability distribution of the most extreme events and the ambiguity of paleoclimatic records for short-term events mean that it is not yet possible to quantify the absolute probability of occurrence of any observed weather event in a hypothetical pristine climate. At present, therefore, the evidence does not support the claim that we are observing weather events that would, individually, have been extremely unlikely in the absence of human-induced climate change, although observed trends in the concurrence of large numbers of events (see {Chapters.10.10_6.10_6_1 Section 10.6.1}) may be more easily attributable to external factors. The most important development since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} is an emerging consensus that the role of external drivers of climate change in specific extreme weather events, including events that might have occurred in a pre-industrial climate, can be quantified using a probabilistic approach.
