index: hide
name: Chemical Digestion

Large food molecules (for example, proteins, lipids, nucleic acids, and starches) must be broken down into subunits that are small enough to be absorbed by the lining of the alimentary canal. This is accomplished by enzymes through hydrolysis. The many enzymes involved in chemical digestion are summarized in .


****

| Enzyme Category | Enzyme Name | Source | Substrate | Product |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Salivary Enzymes | Lingual lipase | Lingual glands | Triglycerides | Free fatty acids, and mono- and diglycerides |
| Salivary Enzymes | Salivary amylase | Salivary glands | Polysaccharides | Disaccharides and trisaccharides |
| Gastric enzymes | Gastric lipase | Chief cells | Triglycerides | Fatty acids and monoacylglycerides |
| Gastric enzymes | Pepsin* | Chief cells | Proteins | Peptides |
| Brush border enzymes | α-Dextrinase | Small intestine | α-Dextrins | Glucose |
| Brush border enzymes | Enteropeptidase | Small intestine | Trypsinogen | Trypsin |
| Brush border enzymes | Lactase | Small intestine | Lactose | Glucose and galactose |
| Brush border enzymes | Maltase | Small intestine | Maltose | Glucose |
| Brush border enzymes | Nucleosidases and phosphatases | Small intestine | Nucleotides | Phosphates, nitrogenous bases, and pentoses |
| Brush border enzymes | Peptidases | Small intestine |  Aminopeptidase: amino acids at the amino end of peptides Dipeptidase: dipeptides  |  Aminopeptidase: amino acids and peptides Dipeptidase: amino acids  |
| Brush border enzymes | Sucrase | Small intestine | Sucrose | Glucose and fructose |
| Pancreatic enzymes | Carboxy-peptidase* | Pancreatic acinar cells | Amino acids at the carboxyl end of peptides | Amino acids and peptides |
| Pancreatic enzymes | Chymotrypsin* | Pancreatic acinar cells | Proteins | Peptides |
| Pancreatic enzymes | Elastase* | Pancreatic acinar cells | Proteins | Peptides |
| Pancreatic enzymes | Nucleases | Pancreatic acinar cells |  Ribonuclease: ribonucleic acids Deoxyribonuclease: deoxyribonucleic acids  | Nucleotides |
| Pancreatic enzymes | Pancreatic amylase | Pancreatic acinar cells | Polysaccharides (starches) | α-Dextrins, disaccharides (maltose), trisaccharides (maltotriose) |
| Pancreatic enzymes | Pancreatic lipase | Pancreatic acinar cells | Triglycerides that have been emulsified by bile salts | Fatty acids and monoacylglycerides |
| Pancreatic enzymes | Trypsin* | Pancreatic acinar cells | Proteins | Peptides |
    

## Carbohydrate Digestion

The average American diet is about 50 percent carbohydrates, which may be classified according to the number of monomers they contain of simple sugars (monosaccharides and disaccharides) and/or complex sugars (polysaccharides). Glucose, galactose, and fructose are the three monosaccharides that are commonly consumed and are readily absorbed. Your digestive system is also able to break down the disaccharide sucrose (regular table sugar: glucose + fructose), lactose (milk sugar: glucose + galactose), and maltose (grain sugar: glucose + glucose), and the polysaccharides glycogen and starch (chains of monosaccharides). Your bodies do not produce enzymes that can break down most fibrous polysaccharides, such as cellulose. While indigestible polysaccharides do not provide any nutritional value, they do provide dietary fiber, which helps propel food through the alimentary canal.

The chemical digestion of starches begins in the mouth and has been reviewed above.

In the small intestine,  **pancreatic amylase** does the ‘heavy lifting’ for starch and carbohydrate digestion ({'Figure_24_7_2 Figure 24.7.2}). After amylases break down starch into smaller fragments, the brush border enzyme  **α-dextrinase** starts working on  **α-dextrin**, breaking off one glucose unit at a time. Three brush border enzymes hydrolyze sucrose, lactose, and maltose into monosaccharides.  **Sucrase** splits sucrose into one molecule of fructose and one molecule of glucose;  **maltase** breaks down maltose and maltotriose into two and three glucose molecules, respectively; and  **lactase** breaks down lactose into one molecule of glucose and one molecule of galactose. Insufficient lactase can lead to lactose intolerance.


{image:'Figure_24_7_2}
        

## Protein Digestion

Proteins are polymers composed of amino acids linked by peptide bonds to form long chains. Digestion reduces them to their constituent amino acids. You usually consume about 15 to 20 percent of your total calorie intake as protein.

The digestion of protein starts in the stomach, where HCl and pepsin break proteins into smaller polypeptides, which then travel to the small intestine ({'Figure_24_7_3 Figure 24.7.3}). Chemical digestion in the small intestine is continued by pancreatic enzymes, including chymotrypsin and trypsin, each of which act on specific bonds in amino acid sequences. At the same time, the cells of the brush border secrete enzymes such as  **aminopeptidase** and  **dipeptidase**, which further break down peptide chains. This results in molecules small enough to enter the bloodstream ({'Figure_24_7_4 Figure 24.7.4}).


{image:'Figure_24_7_3}
        


{image:'Figure_24_7_4}
        

## Lipid Digestion

A healthy diet limits lipid intake to 35 percent of total calorie intake. The most common dietary lipids are triglycerides, which are made up of a glycerol molecule bound to three fatty acid chains. Small amounts of dietary cholesterol and phospholipids are also consumed.

The three lipases responsible for lipid digestion are lingual lipase, gastric lipase, and  **pancreatic lipase**. However, because the pancreas is the only consequential source of lipase, virtually all lipid digestion occurs in the small intestine. Pancreatic lipase breaks down each triglyceride into two free fatty acids and a monoglyceride. The fatty acids include both short-chain (less than 10 to 12 carbons) and long-chain fatty acids.

## Nucleic Acid Digestion

The nucleic acids DNA and RNA are found in most of the foods you eat. Two types of  **pancreatic nuclease** are responsible for their digestion:  **deoxyribonuclease**, which digests DNA, and  **ribonuclease**, which digests RNA. The nucleotides produced by this digestion are further broken down by two intestinal brush border enzymes ( **nucleosidase** and  **phosphatase**) into pentoses, phosphates, and nitrogenous bases, which can be absorbed through the alimentary canal wall. The large food molecules that must be broken down into subunits are summarized 


****

| Source | Substance |
|:-:|:-:|
| Carbohydrates | Monosaccharides: glucose, galactose, and fructose |
| Proteins | Single amino acids, dipeptides, and tripeptides |
| Triglycerides | Monoacylglycerides, glycerol, and free fatty acids |
| Nucleic acids | Pentose sugars, phosphates, and nitrogenous bases |
    
