index: hide
name: Phosphorus

The name  *phosphorus* comes from the Greek words meaning  *light bringing.* When phosphorus was first isolated, scientists noted that it glowed in the dark and burned when exposed to air. Phosphorus is the only member of its group that does not occur in the uncombined state in nature; it exists in many allotropic forms. We will consider two of those forms: white phosphorus and red phosphorus.

White phosphorus is a white, waxy solid that melts at 44.2 °C and boils at 280 °C. It is insoluble in water (in which it is stored—see {'Figure_18_4_Phosphorus Figure 18.4.Phosphorus}), is very soluble in carbon disulfide, and bursts into flame in air. As a solid, as a liquid, as a gas, and in solution, white phosphorus exists as P<sub>4</sub> molecules with four phosphorus atoms at the corners of a regular tetrahedron, as illustrated in {'Figure_18_4_Phosphorus Figure 18.4.Phosphorus}. Each phosphorus atom covalently bonds to the other three atoms in the molecule by single covalent bonds. White phosphorus is the most reactive allotrope and is very toxic.


{image:'Figure_18_4_Phosphorus}
        

Heating white phosphorus to 270–300 °C in the absence of air yields red phosphorus. Red phosphorus (shown in {'Figure_18_4_Phosphorus Figure 18.4.Phosphorus}) is denser, has a higher melting point (~600 °C), is much less reactive, is essentially nontoxic, and is easier and safer to handle than is white phosphorus. Its structure is highly polymeric and appears to contain three-dimensional networks of P<sub>4</sub> tetrahedra joined by P-P single bonds. Red phosphorus is insoluble in solvents that dissolve white phosphorus. When red phosphorus is heated, P<sub>4</sub> molecules sublime from the solid.
