index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.4.3.1
title: 13.4.3.1 - Surface Mass Balance Change

Greenland SMB is positive in the present climate but shows a decreasing {Glossary.*Trend trend} ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_3.13_3_3_2 Section 13.3.3.2}), which implies an increasing contribution to GMSL rise. Like the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, all recent studies have indicated that the future {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} contribution from Greenland SMB change will be increasingly positive because the increase in ablation (mostly {Glossary.*Runoff runoff}) outweighs that in {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} (mostly snowfall), and that {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} of greater RF lead to a larger sea level contribution. Precipitation is projected to increase at about 5% per °C of annual-mean warming over Greenland, but the increase in snowfall is smaller because the fraction of rain increases as temperature rises ({cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006}; {cite.13.'Fettweis_et_al_2013}).

We compare post-AR4 studies of Greenland SMB change using time-dependent simulations of the 21st century by CMIP3 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} for scenario SRES A1B and CMIP5 AOGCMs for scenario RCP4.5 ({'Table_13_4 Table 13.4}). The time-integral of the Greenland SMB anomaly with respect to a reference period is interpreted as a contribution to GMSL rise, on the assumption that the {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} was in approximate mass balance during the reference period (see discussion in Sections {Chapters.13.13_1.13_1_4.13_1_4_1 13.1.4.1} and {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_3.13_3_3_2 13.3.3.2}); this assumption can be avoided only if ice-sheet outflow is also modelled. Making this assumption, the Greenland SMB contribution lies in the range 0.00 to 0.13 m for these two scenarios.

{table:'Table_13_4}

The spread in the magnitude and patterns of Greenland climate change projected by the AOGCMs causes a large part of the spread in the projected contribution to GMSL rise ({'Table_13_4 Table 13.4}). {cite.13.'Yoshimori_and_AbeOuchi_2012 Yoshimori and AbeOuchi (2012)} found that the inter-{Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} in global mean SAT change accounts for about 60% of the spread in the change of projected Greenland ablation. Two important contributions to the remaining spread are the weakening of the AMOC, which affects the magnitude of warming over Greenland, and the SAT of Greenland in the model control climate, which affects the sensitivity of melting to warming (Yoshimori and Abe-Ouchi, 2012; {cite.13.'Fettweis_et_al_2013}).

Ablation is computed using either an {Glossary.*Energy_Balance_Model EBM}, which may be stand-alone or part of a {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} model, or from surface air temperature using an empirical temperature index method, mostly commonly the positive-degree-day (PDD) method, in which melting is proportional to the time-integral of temperature above the freezing point. Meltwater production increases faster than linearly with temperature increase because of reduced {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} due to refreezing of meltwater in the snowpack and expansion of the area of bare ice (van Angelen et al., 2012; {cite.13.'Fettweis_et_al_2013}; {cite.13.'Franco_et_al_2013}). The simulation of this positive albedo {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} on mass loss depends sensitively on the model snow-albedo {Glossary.*Parameterization parameterization} ({cite.13.'Rae_et_al_2012}). {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} projected 14 to 31% more runoff during the 21st century when using an EBM than when using a PDD method, mainly because of the omission of the albedo feedback in the latter. However, other studies using temperature index methods ({cite.13.'Graversen_et_al_2011}; Yoshimori and Abe-Ouchi, 2012) have ranges extending to higher values than those from EBMs, indicating that this is not the only difference between these classes of methods ({'Table_13_4 Table 13.4}).

SMB simulations are also particularly sensitive to the treatment of meltwater refreezing ({cite.13.'Bougamont_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Rae_et_al_2012}). The pore space in the present-day percolation zone could accommodate 1 to 5 mm {Glossary.*Sea_level_equivalent SLE} of refrozen meltwater over the next several decades ({cite.13.'Harper_et_al_2012}), and the importance of meltwater refreezing will become greater as melting becomes prevalent in areas where it has previously been rare. On the other hand, refreezing will be restricted, and runoff consequently increased, by the expansion of the area of bare ice ({cite.13.'Fettweis_et_al_2013}).

Another {Glossary.*Source source} of model spread is the representation of topography, which is lower when represented at coarser {Glossary.*Resolution resolution}. This allows precipitation to spread further inland because of reduced topographic barriers ({cite.13.'Bengtsson_et_al_2011}), and enhances ablation because there is more area at lower, warmer altitudes ({cite.13.'Bengtsson_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Seddik_et_al_2012}). Most of the models in {'Table_13_4 Table 13.4} use a fixed Greenland topography, and thus cannot simulate the positive feedback on ablation that can be expected as the ice-sheet surface becomes lower. Dynamical models are required to simulate this effect ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 Section 13.4.3.2}).

For the present assessment of GMSL rise, changes in Greenland ice sheet SMB up to 2100 have been computed from global mean SAT change {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} derived from the CMIP5 AOGCMs, following methods described in {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_1 Section 13.5.1} and the Supplementary Material. The distribution of results, shown in {'Table_13_5 Table 13.5} and Figures {'Figure_13_10 13.10} and {'Figure_13_11 13.11}, covers the ranges obtained using the methods of {cite.13.'Fettweis_et_al_2013 Fettweis et al. (2013)}, {cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006 Gregory and Huybrechts (2006)}, and Yoshimori and Abe-Ouchi (2012).

On multi-centennial to millennial time scales, feedbacks between regional climate and the ice sheet become increasingly relevant, especially under strong climate change scenarios, thus requiring coupled climate ice-sheet models to capture potential feedbacks beyond the year 2100. These models apply a reduced spatial resolution in order to be computationally efficient enough to evaluate longer time scales and to combine the different climatic components. Consistent with regional {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} for the 21st century, they project an increasingly negative mass balance for the Greenland ice sheet for all warming scenarios which is mainly due to a decreasing SMB ({cite.13.'Ridley_et_al_2005}; {cite.13.'Winguth_et_al_2005}; {cite.13.'Driesschaert_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Mikolajewicz_et_al_2007a}; {cite.13.'Swingedouw_et_al_2008}; Vizcaíno et al., 2008, 2010; {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013}). The main feedbacks between climate and the ice sheet arise from changes in ice elevation, atmospheric and ocean circulation, and sea-ice distribution.

Comparing the different feedbacks, high confidence can be assigned to the models’ ability to capture the feedback between SMB and sur-

face elevation. As a consequence, a nonlinear increase in ice loss from Greenland with increasing regional RF is found across different scenarios ({cite.13.'Driesschaert_et_al_2007}). This {Glossary.*Nonlinearity nonlinearity} arises from the increase in both the length of the ablation season and the daily amount of melting as the ice-sheet surface lowers. This SMB-surface elevation feedback is also the main reason for the threshold behaviour of the Greenland ice sheet on multi-millennial time scales ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_3 Section 13.4.3.3}).

Medium-to-low confidence is assigned to the models’ representation of the atmospheric and ocean circulation and sea-ice changes. On multi-centennial time scales, {cite.13.'Swingedouw_et_al_2008 Swingedouw et al. (2008)} found enhanced ice loss from Greenland in a coupled simulation (compared to the uncoupled version) in which ice topography and meltwater flux influence the ocean and atmospheric circulation as well as sea-ice distribution. Vizcaíno et al. (2010) found reduced ice loss due to the coupling, mainly caused by the effect of topographic changes on the {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}, but less pronounced in amplitude compared with {cite.13.'Swingedouw_et_al_2008 Swingedouw et al. (2008)}. Both the atmospheric circulation and the ocean currents, especially in coastal areas, are poorly resolved by these models. It is therefore likely that the time scales associated with ocean transport processes are distorted and there is low confidence that these feedbacks, although existent, can be quantified accurately by the applied models.

The AMOC exerts a strong influence on regional climate around the Greenland ice sheet and consequently its SMB. Most CMIP5 models show a reduction of the AMOC under future warming during the 21st century and beyond ({Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_7.12_4_7_2 Section 12.4.7.2}). Although coupled climate–ice sheet models show some influence of meltwater from Greenland on the AMOC, the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} between models with respect to the AMOC response to warming is significantly larger than the difference between simulations with or without this feedback within one model.

In the coupled climate–ice sheet model applied by {cite.13.'Mikolajewicz_et_al_2007a Mikolajewicz et al. (2007a)} and Vizcaíno et al. (2008), the AMOC shows a strongly nonlinear response to global warming. A weak AMOC reduction is found for 1%-per-year-{Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}-increase scenarios up to 560 and 840 ppm, and a near-complete cessation of the AMOC for 1120 ppm. As a consequence, after 600 years of integration, the sea level contribution for the 1120 ppm scenario is similar to that of the 560 ppm scenario, but doubles for the medium scenario, which stabilizes at 840 ppm. In the most recent model version (Vizcaíno et al., 2010), the AMOC shows a strong weakening of the AMOC in all scenarios (~60% reduction in 560 ppm scenario; ~80% for 1120 ppm). The total sea level contribution from Greenland, including the effect of the AMOC weakening, is ~1 m (corresponding to an average rate of 1.7 mm yr–1) for 560 ppm CO2 and ~3 m (5 mm yr–1) for 1120 ppm CO2.

Even though the AMOC weakening in the model by {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)} is less pronounced (10 to 25%), the ice loss through melting is significantly weaker in this model. During the first 1000 years of integration, the Greenland ice sheet contributes 0.36 m (corresponding to an average rate of 0.36 mm yr–1) for 560 ppm CO2 and 2.59 m (2.59 mm yr–1) for 1120 ppm CO2. In {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)}, the respective increases in global mean SAT are 2.4°C (2 × CO2) and 6.3°C (4 × CO2) after 1000 years with respect to pre-industrial. This relatively weak warming response to GHG {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} compared to CMIP5 models and the climate model used in Vizcaíno et al. (2010) explains the relatively small sea level response.

Using the same model as {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)}, albeit with a slightly higher polar warming, {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2012 Goelzer et al. (2012)} computed temperatures and sea level under the {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} B1, A1B and A2, with subsequent GHG stabilization after the year 2100. As in {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)}, the ice-sheet evolution is dominated by the SMB. They find sea level contributions of 1.4, 2.6 and 4.2 m in the year 3000 for the scenarios B1, A1B and B2, which correspond to mean rates of sea level rise of 1.4 mm yr–1, 2.6 mm yr–1, and 4.2 mm yr–1, respectively.

In summary, coupled climate-ice sheet models consistently show an increasingly negative mass balance of the Greenland ice sheet due mainly to a decreasing SMB under warming scenarios on centennial time scales beyond 2100. On multi-millennial time scales, these models show a threshold temperature beyond which the melting of the Greenland ice sheet self-amplifies and the ice volume is reduced to less than 30% of its present volume ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_3 Section 13.4.3.3}).
