index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 3.8.1.2
title: 3.8.1.2 - Changes in the Oceanic Inventory of Anthropogenic Carbon Dioxide

Ocean carbon {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} and storage is inferred from changes in the inventory of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} carbon. Cant cannot be measured directly but is calculated from observations of ocean properties ({Appendix_3_A Appendix 3.A} discusses the sampling on which the ocean carbon inventory is based). Two independent data-based methods to calculate anthropogenic carbon inventories exist: the ΔC&#42; method ({cite.3.'Sabine_et_al_2004}), and the transit time distribution (TTD) method ({cite.3.'Waugh_et_al_2006}). The Green’s function approach that applies the maximum entropy de-convolution methodology ({cite.3.'Khatiwala_et_al_2009}) is related to the latter. These approaches use different tracer data, for instance, the TTD method is based mostly on chlorofluorcarbon measurements. Changes due to variability in ocean productivity ({cite.3.'Chavez_et_al_2011}) are not considered.

Estimates of the global inventory of Cant (including marginal seas) calculated using these methods have a mean value of 118 PgC and a range of 93 to 137 PgC in 1994 and a mean of 160 PgC and range of 134 to 186 PgC in 2010 ({cite.3.'Sabine_et_al_2004}; {cite.3.'Waugh_et_al_2006}; {cite.3.'Khatiwala_et_al_2009}, 2013). When combined with model results ({cite.3.'MikaloffFletcher_et_al_2006}; {cite.3.'Doney_et_al_2009}; {cite.3.'Gerber_et_al_2009}; {cite.3.'Graven_et_al_2012}), {cite.3.'Khatiwala_et_al_2013 Khatiwala et al. (2013)} arrive at a “best” estimate of the global ocean inventory (including marginal seas) of anthropogenic carbon from 1750 to 2010 of 155 PgC with an uncertainty of ±20% ({'Figure_3_16 Figure 3.16}). While the estimates of total inventory agree within their uncertainty, the different methods result in significant differences in the inferred spatial distribution of Cant, particularly at high latitudes.

{image:'Figure_3_16}

The Cant inventory “best” estimate of 155 PgC ({cite.3.'Khatiwala_et_al_2013}; {'Figure_3_16 Figure 3.16}) corresponds to an uptake rate of 2.3 (range of 1.7 to 2.9) PgC yr–1 from 2000 to 2010, in close agreement with an independent estimate of 2.5 (range of 1.8 to 3.2) PgC yr–1 based on atmospheric O2/ N2 measurements obtained for the same period ({cite.3.'Ishidoya_et_al_2012}). The O2/N2 method resulted in 2.2 ± 0.6 PgC yr–1 for the time period 1990 to 2000 and 2.5 ± 0.6 for the period from 2000 to 2010 ({cite.3.'Keeling_and_Manning_2014}). These estimates are also consistent with an independent estimate of 1.9 ± 0.4 PgC yr–1 for the period between 1970 and 1990 based on depth-integrated d13C changes ({cite.3.'Quay_et_al_2003}) and with estimates inferred from ∆pCO2.

The storage rate of anthropogenic {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} is assessed by calculating the change in Cant concentrations between two time periods. Regional observations of the storage rate are in general agreement with that expected from the increase in atmospheric CO2 concentrations and with the tracer-based estimates. However, there are significant spatial and temporal variations in the degree to which the inventory of Cant tracks changes in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} ({'Figure_3_17 Figure 3.17}). The North Atlantic, in particular, is an area with high variability in circulation and deep water formation, influencing the Cant inventory. As a result of the decline in Labrador Sea Water (LSW) formation since 1997 ({cite.3.'Rhein_et_al_2011}), the Cant increase between 1997 and 2003 was smaller in the subpolar North Atlantic than expected from the atmospheric increase, in contrast to the subtropical and equatorial Atlantic ({cite.3.'Steinfeldt_et_al_2009}). Perez et al. (2010) also noted the dependence of the Cant storage rate in the North Atlantic on the {Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation NAO}, with high Cant storage rate during phases of high NAO (i.e., high LSW formation rates) and low storage during phases of low NAO (low formation). {cite.3.'Wanninkhof_et_al_2010 Wanninkhof et al. (2010)} found a smaller inventory increase in the North Atlantic compared to the South Atlantic between 1989 and 2005.

{image:'Figure_3_17}

Ocean observations are insufficient to assess whether there has been a change in the rate of total (anthropogenic plus natural) carbon uptake by the global ocean. Evidence from regional ocean studies (often covering relatively short time periods), atmospheric observations and models is equivocal, with some studies suggesting the ocean uptake rate of total CO2 may have declined (Le Quéré et al., 2007; {cite.3.'Schuster_and_Watson_2007}; {cite.3.'McKinley_et_al_2011}) while others conclude that there is little evidence for a decline ({cite.3.'Knorr_2009}; {cite.3.'Gloor_et_al_2010}; {cite.3.'Sarmiento_et_al_2010}). A study based on atmospheric CO2 observations and {Topics.*Emissions emission} inventories concluded that global carbon uptake by land and oceans doubled from 1960 to 2010, implying that it is unlikely that on a global scale both land and ocean sinks decreased ({cite.3.'Ballantyne_et_al_2012}).

In summary, the high agreement between multiple lines of independent evidence for increases in the ocean inventory of Cant underpins the conclusion that it is virtually certain that the ocean is sequestering anthropogenic carbon dioxide and very likely that the oceanic Cant inventory increased from 1994 to 2010. Oceanic carbon uptake rates calculated using different data sets and methods agree within their {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} and very likely range between 1.0 and 3.2 PgC yr–1.
