index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.1.2
title: 8.7.1.2 - The Global Warming Potential Concept

The Global Warming Potential ({Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP}) is defined as the time-integrated RF due to a pulse emission of a given component, relative to a pulse emission of an equal mass of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} ({'Figure_8_28 Figure 8.28}a and formula). The GWP was presented in the First IPCC Assessment ({cite.8.'Houghton_et_al_1990}), stating ‘It must be stressed that there is no universally accepted methodology for combining all the relevant factors into a single global warming potential for {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} {Topics.*Emissions emissions}. A simple approach has been adopted here to illustrate the difficulties inherent in the concept, ...’. Further, the First IPCC Assessment gave no clear physical interpretation of the GWP.

{image:'Figure_8_28}

A direct interpretation is that the GWP is an index of the total energy added to the climate system by a component in question relative to that added by CO2. However, the GWP does not lead to equivalence with temperature or other climate variables ({cite.8.'Fuglestvedt_et_al_2000}, 2003; O’Neill, 2000; {cite.8.'Daniel_et_al_2012}; {cite.8.'Smith_and_Wigley_2000}; {cite.8.'Tanaka_et_al_2009}). Thus, the name ‘Global Warming Potential’ may be somewhat misleading, and ‘relative cumulative {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} index’ would be more appropriate. It can be shown that the GWP is approximately equal to the ratio (normalizing by the similar expression for CO2) of the equilibrium temperature response due to a sustained emission of the species or to the integrated temperature response for a pulse emission (assuming efficacies are equal for the gases that are compared; O’Neill, 2000; {cite.8.'Prather_2002}; {cite.8.'Shine_et_al_2005a}; {cite.8.'Peters_et_al_2011a}; {cite.8.'Azar_and_Johansson_2012}).

The GWP has become the default {Glossary.*Metric metric} for transferring emissions of different gases to a common scale; often called ‘CO2 equivalent emissions’ (e.g., {cite.8.'Shine_2009}). It has usually been integrated over 20, 100 or 500 years consistent with {cite.8.'Houghton_et_al_1990 Houghton et al. (1990)}. Note, however that Houghton et al. presented these time horizons as ‘candidates for discussion [that] should not be considered as having any special significance’. The GWP for a time horizon of 100 years was later adopted as a metric to implement the multi-gas approach embedded in the United Nations {Glossary.*Framework_Convention_on_Climate_Change Framework Convention on Climate Change} ({Glossary.*United_Nations_Framework_Convention_on_Climate_Change UNFCCC}) and made operational in the 1997 {Glossary.*Kyoto_Protocol Kyoto Protocol}. The choice of time horizon has a strong effect on the GWP values — and thus also on the calculated contributions of CO equivalent emissions by component, sector or nation. There is no scientific argument for selecting 100 years compared with other choices ({cite.8.'Fuglestvedt_et_al_2003}; {cite.8.'Shine_2009}). The choice of time horizon is a value judgement because it depends on the relative weight assigned to effects at different times. Other important choices include the background {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} on which the GWP calculations are superimposed, and the way indirect effects and feedbacks are included (see {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1.8_7_1_4 Section 8.7.1.4}).

For some gases the variation in GWP with time horizon mainly reflects properties of the reference gas, not the gas for which the GWP is calculated. The GWP for NTCFs decreases with increasing time horizon, as GWP is defined with the integrated RF of CO2 in the denominator. As shown in {'Figure_8_29 Figure 8.29}, after about five decades the development in the GWP for {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} is almost entirely determined by CO2. However, for longlived gases (e.g., SF6) the development in GWP is controlled by both the increasing integrals of RF from the long-lived gas and CO2.

{image:'Figure_8_29}
