index: hide
public: ar5-Box-2.3
name: Box 2.3
title: Box 2.3 - Global Atmospheric Reanalyses

Dynamical reanalyses are increasingly used for assessing weather and climate phenomena. Given their more frequent use in this assessment compared to {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, their characteristics are described in more detail here.

Reanalyses are distinct from, but complement, more ‘traditional’ statistical approaches to assessing the raw observations. They aim to produce continuous reconstructions of past atmospheric states that are consistent with all observations as well as with atmospheric physics as represented in a numerical weather {Topics.*Climate_Predictions prediction} model, a process termed data assimilation. Unlike real-world observations, reanalyses are uniform in space and time and provide non-observable variables (e.g., potential vorticity).

Several groups are actively pursuing {Topics.*Reanalysis reanalysis} development at the global scale, and many of these have produced several generations of reanalyses products ({Box_2_3 Box 2.3}, {'Box_2_3_Table_1 Table 1}). Since the first generation of reanalyses produced in the 1990s, substantial development has taken place. The NASA Modern-Era Retrospective Analysis for Research and Applications (MERRA) and ERA-Interim reanalyses show improved tropical precipitation and hence better represent the global {Glossary.*Hydrological_cycle hydrological cycle} ({cite.2.'Dee_et_al_2011b}). The NCEP/CFSR reanalysis uses a coupled ocean–{Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}–land-sea–ice model ({cite.2.'Saha_et_al_2010}). The 20th Century Reanalyses (20CR, {cite.2.'Compo_et_al_2011}) is a 56-member {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} and covers 140 years by assimilating only surface and {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} pressure (SLP) information. This variety of groups and approaches provides some indication of the robustness of reanalyses when compared. In addition to the global reanalyses, several regional reanalyses exist or are currently being produced.

{table:'Box_2_3_Table_1}

Reanalyses products provide invaluable information on time scales ranging from daily to interannual variability. However, they may often be unable to characterize long-term trends ({cite.2.'Trenberth_et_al_2011}). Although reanalyses projects by definition use a ‘frozen’ assimilation system, there are many other sources of potential errors. In addition to model biases, changes in the observational systems (e.g., coverage, introduction of satellite data) and time-dependent errors in the underlying observations or in the boundary conditions lead to step changes in time, even in latest generation reanalyses ({cite.2.'Bosilovich_et_al_2011}).

Errors of this sort were ubiquitous in early generation reanalyses and rendered them of limited value for {Glossary.*Trend trend} characterization ({cite.2.'Thorne_and_Vose_2010}). Subsequent products have improved and {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} are better understood ({cite.2.'Dee_et_al_2011a}), but artefacts are still present. As a consequence, trend adequacy depends on the variable under consideration, the time period and the {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} of interest. For example, surface air temperature and humidity trends over land in the ERA-Interim reanalysis compare well with observations ({cite.2.'Simmons_et_al_2010}), but polar tropospheric temperature trends in ERA-40 disagree with trends derived from radiosonde and satellite observations ({cite.2.'Bitz_and_Fu_2008}; {cite.2.'Grant_et_al_2008}; {cite.2.'Graversen_et_al_2008}; {cite.2.'Thorne_2008}; {cite.2.'Screen_and_Simmonds_2011}) owing to problems that were resolved in ERA-Interim ({cite.2.'Dee_et_al_2011a}).

Studies based on reanalyses are used cautiously in AR5 and known inadequacies are pointed out and referenced. Later generation reanalyses are preferred where possible; however, literature based on these new products is still sparse.
