index: hide
name: Zoonotic Febrile Diseases

A wide variety of zoonotic febrile diseases (diseases that cause fever) are caused by pathogenic bacteria that require arthropod vectors. These pathogens are either obligate intracellular species of  *Anaplasma, Bartonella*,  *Ehrlichia, Orientia,* and  *Rickettsia*, or spirochetes in the genus  *Borrelia*. Isolation and identification of pathogens in this group are best performed in  **BSL-3** laboratories because of the low infective dose associated with the diseases.

## Anaplasmosis

The zoonotic tickborne disease  **human granulocytic anaplasmosis (HGA)** is caused by the obligate intracellular pathogen  **Anaplasma phagocytophilum**. HGA is endemic primarily in the central and northeastern US and in countries in Europe and Asia.

HGA is usually a mild febrile disease that causes flu-like symptoms in immunocompetent patients; however, symptoms are severe enough to require hospitalization in at least 50% of infections and, of those patients, less than 1% will die of HGA. Small mammals such as white-footed mice, chipmunks, and voles have been identified as reservoirs of  *A. phagocytophilum*, which is transmitted by the bite of an  **Ixodes tick**. Five major virulence factors have been reported in  *Anaplasma*; three are adherence factors and two are factors that allow the pathogen to avoid the human immune response. Diagnostic approaches include locating intracellular microcolonies of  *Anaplasma* through microscopic examination of neutrophils or eosinophils stained with Giemsa or Wright stain, PCR for detection of  *A. phagocytophilum*, and serological tests to detect antibody titers against the pathogens. The primary antibiotic used for treatment is  **doxycycline**.

## Ehrlichiosis

Human monocytotropic ehrlichiosis (HME) is a zoonotic tickborne disease caused by the BSL-2, obligate intracellular pathogen  **Ehrlichia chaffeensis**. Currently, the geographic distribution of HME is primarily the eastern half of the US, with a few cases reported in the West, which corresponds with the known geographic distribution of the primary vector, the lone star tick ( **Amblyomma americanum**). Symptoms of HME are similar to the flu-like symptoms observed in anaplasmosis, but a rash is more common, with 60% of children and less than 30% of adults developing petechial, macula, and maculopapular rashes. Virulence factors allow  *E. chaffeensis* to adhere to and infect monocytes, forming intracellular microcolonies in monocytes that are diagnostic for the HME. Diagnosis of HME can be confirmed with PCR and serologic tests. The first-line treatment for adults and children of all ages with HME is  **doxycycline**.

## Epidemic Typhus

The disease  **epidemic typhus** is caused by  **Rickettsia prowazekii** and is transmitted by body lice,  **Pediculus humanus**. Flying squirrels are animal reservoirs of  *R. prowazekii* in North America and can also be sources of lice capable of transmitting the pathogen. Epidemic typhus is characterized by a high fever and body aches that last for about 2 weeks. A rash develops on the abdomen and chest and radiates to the extremities. Severe cases can result in death from shock or damage to heart and brain tissues. Infected humans are an important reservoir for this bacterium because  *R. prowazekii* is the only  *Rickettsia* that can establish a chronic carrier state in humans.

Epidemic typhus has played an important role in human history, causing large outbreaks with high mortality rates during times of war or adversity. During  **World War I**, epidemic typhus killed more than 3 million people on the Eastern front. With the advent of effective insecticides and improved personal hygiene, epidemic typhus is now quite rare in the US. In the developing world, however, epidemics can lead to mortality rates of up to 40% in the absence of treatment. In recent years, most outbreaks have taken place in Burundi, Ethiopia, and Rwanda. For example, an outbreak in Burundi refugee camps in 1997 resulted in 45,000 illnesses in a population of about 760,000 people.

A rapid diagnosis is difficult because of the similarity of the primary symptoms with those of many other diseases. Molecular and immunohistochemical diagnostic tests are the most useful methods for establishing a diagnosis during the acute stage of illness when therapeutic decisions are critical. PCR to detect distinctive genes from  *R. prowazekii* can be used to confirm the diagnosis of epidemic typhus, along with immunofluorescent staining of tissue biopsy specimens. Serology is usually used to identify rickettsial infections. However, adequate antibody titers take up to 10 days to develop. Antibiotic therapy is typically begun before the diagnosis is complete. The most common drugs used to treat patients with epidemic typhus are  **doxycycline** or  **chloramphenicol**.

## Murine (Endemic) Typhus

Murine typhus (also known as endemic typhus) is caused by  **Rickettsia typhi** and is transmitted by the bite of the rat flea,  **Xenopsylla cheopis**, with infected rats as the main reservoir. Clinical signs and symptoms of  **murine typhus** include a rash and chills accompanied by headache and fever that last about 12 days. Some patients also exhibit a cough and pneumonia-like symptoms. Severe illness can develop in immunocompromised patients, with seizures, coma, and renal and respiratory failure.

Clinical diagnosis of murine typhus can be confirmed from a biopsy specimen from the rash. Diagnostic tests include indirect immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) staining, PCR for  *R. typhi*, and acute and convalescent serologic testing. Primary treatment is  **doxycycline**, with  **chloramphenicol** as the second choice.

## Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever

The disease  **Rocky Mountain spotted fever** (RMSF) is caused by  **Rickettsia rickettsii** and is transmitted by the bite of a hard-bodied tick such as the American dog tick ( **Dermacentor variabilis**), Rocky Mountain wood tick ( *D. andersoni*), or brown dog tick ( **Rhipicephalus sanguineus**).

This disease is endemic in North and South America and its incidence is coincident with the arthropod vector range. Despite its name, most cases in the US do not occur in the Rocky Mountain region but in the Southeast; North Carolina, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Tennessee, and Missouri account for greater than 60% of all cases. The map in {'Figure_25_2_RMSF Figure 25.2.RMSF} shows the distribution of prevalence in the US in 2010.


{image:'Figure_25_2_RMSF}
        

Signs and symptoms of RMSF include a high fever, headache, body aches, nausea, and vomiting. A  **petechial rash** (similar in appearance to measles) begins on the hands and wrists, and spreads to the trunk, face, and extremities ({'Figure_25_2_RMSFRash Figure 25.2.RMSFRash}). If untreated, RMSF is a serious illness that can be fatal in the first 8 days even in otherwise healthy patients. Ideally, treatment should begin before petechiae develop, because this is a sign of progression to severe disease; however, the rash usually does not appear until day 6 or later after onset of symptoms and only occurs in 35%–60% of patients with the infection. Increased vascular permeability associated with petechiae formation can result in fatality rates of 3% or greater, even in the presence of clinical support. Most deaths are due to  **hypotension** and cardiac arrest or from ischemia following blood coagulation.

Diagnosis can be challenging because the disease mimics several other diseases that are more prevalent. The diagnosis of RMSF is made based on symptoms, fluorescent antibody staining of a biopsy specimen from the rash, PCR for  *Rickettsia rickettsii*, and acute and convalescent serologic testing. Primary treatment is  **doxycycline**, with  **chloramphenicol** as the second choice.


{image:'Figure_25_2_RMSFRash}
        

## Lyme Disease

 **Lyme disease** is caused by the spirochete  **Borrelia burgdorferi** that is transmitted by the bite of a hard-bodied, black-legged  *Ixodes* tick.  *I. scapularis* is the biological vector transmitting  *B. burgdorferi* in the eastern and north-central US and  *I. pacificus* transmits  *B. burgdorferi* in the western US ({'Figure_25_2_Borrelia Figure 25.2.Borrelia}). Different species of  *Ixodes* ticks are responsible for  *B. burgdorferi* transmission in Asia and Europe. In the US, Lyme disease is the most commonly reported vectorborne illness. In 2014, it was the fifth most common Nationally Notifiable disease.

 *Ixodes* ticks have complex life cycles and deer, mice, and even birds can act as reservoirs. Over 2 years, the ticks pass through four developmental stages and require a blood meal from a host at each stage. In the spring, tick eggs hatch into six-legged larvae. These larvae do not carry  *B. burgdorferi* initially. They may acquire the spirochete when they take their first blood meal (typically from a mouse). The larvae then overwinter and molt into eight-legged nymphs in the following spring. Nymphs take blood meals primarily from small rodents, but may also feed on humans, burrowing into the skin. The feeding period can last several days to a week, and it typically takes 24 hours for an infected nymph to transmit enough  *B. burgdorferi* to cause infection in a human host. Nymphs ultimately mature into male and female adult ticks, which tend to feed on larger animals like deer or, occasionally, humans. The adults then mate and produce eggs to continue the cycle ({'Figure_25_2_Ixodes Figure 25.2.Ixodes}).


{image:'Figure_25_2_Ixodes}
        

The symptoms of Lyme disease follow three stages: early localized, early disseminated, and late stage. During the early-localized stage, approximately 70%–80% of cases may be characterized by a bull's-eye rash, called erythema migrans, at the site of the initial tick bite. The rash forms 3 to 30 days after the tick bite (7 days is the average) and may also be warm to the touch ({'Figure_25_2_Borrelia Figure 25.2.Borrelia}). This diagnostic sign is often overlooked if the tick bite occurs on the scalp or another less visible location. Other early symptoms include flu-like symptoms such as malaise, headache, fever, and muscle stiffness. If the patient goes untreated, the second early-disseminated stage of the disease occurs days to weeks later. The symptoms at this stage may include severe headache, neck stiffness, facial paralysis, arthritis, and carditis. The late-stage manifestations of the disease may occur years after exposure. Chronic inflammation causes damage that can eventually cause severe arthritis, meningitis, encephalitis, and altered mental states. The disease may be fatal if untreated.

A presumptive diagnosis of  **Lyme disease** can be made based solely on the presence of a bull’s-eye rash at the site of infection, if it is present, in addition to other associated symptoms ({'Figure_25_2_Borrelia Figure 25.2.Borrelia}). In addition, indirect immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) labeling can be used to visualize bacteria from blood or skin biopsy specimens. Serological tests like ELISA can also be used to detect serum antibodies produced in response to infection. During the early stage of infection (about 30 days), antibacterial drugs such as amoxicillin and doxycycline are effective. In the later stages,  **penicillin G**,  **chloramphenicol**, or  **ceftriaxone** can be given intravenously.


{image:'Figure_25_2_Borrelia}
        

## Relapsing Fever

 *Borrelia* spp. also can cause  **relapsing fever**. Two of the most common species are  **B. recurrentis**, which causes epidemics of louseborne relapsing fever, and  **B. hermsii**, which causes tickborne relapsing fevers. These  *Borrelia* species are transmitted by the body louse  **Pediculus humanus** and the soft-bodied tick  **Ornithodoros hermsi**, respectively. Lice acquire the spirochetes from human reservoirs, whereas ticks acquire them from rodent reservoirs. Spirochetes infect humans when  *Borrelia* in the vector’s saliva or excreta enter the skin rapidly as the vector bites.

In both louse- and tickborne relapsing fevers, bacteremia usually occurs after the initial exposure, leading to a sudden high fever (39–43 °C [102.2–109.4 °F) typically accompanied by headache and muscle aches. After about 3 days, these symptoms typically subside, only to return again after about a week. After another 3 days, the symptoms subside again but return a week later, and this cycle may repeat several times unless it is disrupted by antibiotic treatment. Immune evasion through bacterial antigenic variation is responsible for the cyclical nature of the symptoms in these diseases.

The diagnosis of relapsing fever can be made by observation of spirochetes in blood, using  **darkfield microscopy** ({'Figure_25_2_RelapsFev Figure 25.2.RelapsFev}). For louseborne relapsing fever,  **doxycycline** or  **erythromycin** are the first-line antibiotics. For tickborne relapsing fever,  **tetracycline** or erythromycin are the first-line antibiotics.


{image:'Figure_25_2_RelapsFev}
        

## Trench Fever

The louseborne disease  **trench fever** was first characterized as a specific disease during World War I, when approximately 1 million soldiers were infected. Today, it is primarily limited to areas of the developing world where poor sanitation and hygiene lead to infestations of lice (e.g., overpopulated urban areas and refugee camps). Trench fever is caused by the gram-negative bacterium  **Bartonella quintana**, which is transmitted when feces from infected body lice,  **Pediculus humanus var corporis**, are rubbed into the louse bite, abraded skin, or the conjunctiva. The symptoms typically follow a 5-day course marked by a high fever, body aches, conjunctivitis, ocular pain, severe headaches, and severe bone pain in the shins, neck, and back. Diagnosis can be made using blood cultures; serological tests like ELISA can be used to detect antibody titers to the pathogen and PCR can also be used. The first-line antibiotics are  **doxycycline**,  **macrolide antibiotics**, and  **ceftriaxone**.
