index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Bacterial infections of the circulatory system are almost universally serious. Left untreated, most have high mortality rates.
  * Bacterial pathogens usually require a breach in the immune defenses to colonize the circulatory system. Most often, this involves a wound or the bite of an arthropod vector, but it can also occur in hospital settings and result in nosocomial infections.
  *  **Sepsis** from both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria **, puerperal fever, rheumatic fever, endocarditis, gas gangrene, osteomyelitis,** and  **toxic shock syndrome** are typically a result of injury or introduction of bacteria by medical or surgical intervention.
  *  **Tularemia, brucellosis, cat-scratch fever, rat-bite fever,** and  **bubonic plague** are zoonotic diseases transmitted by biological vectors
  *  **Ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, endemic** and  **murine typhus, Rocky Mountain spotted fever, Lyme disease, relapsing fever,** and  **trench fever** are transmitted by arthropod vectors.
  * Because their symptoms are so similar to those of other diseases, many bacterial infections of the circulatory system are difficult to diagnose.
  * Standard antibiotic therapies are effective for the treatment of most bacterial infections of the circulatory system, unless the bacterium is resistant, in which case synergistic treatment may be required.
  * The systemic immune response to a bacteremia, which involves the release of excessive amounts of cytokines, can sometimes be more damaging to the host than the infection itself.
