index: hide
name: Puerperal Sepsis

A type of sepsis called  **puerperal sepsis**, also known as puerperal infection,  **puerperal fever**, or childbed fever, is a nosocomial infection associated with the period of puerperium—the time following childbirth during which the mother’s reproductive system returns to a nonpregnant state. Such infections may originate in the genital tract, breast, urinary tract, or a surgical wound. Initially the infection may be limited to the  uterus or other local site of infection, but it can quickly spread, resulting in peritonitis, septicemia, and death. Before the 19th century work of Ignaz  **Semmelweis** and the widespread acceptance of germ theory (see <link:>), puerperal sepsis was a major cause of mortality among new mothers in the first few days following childbirth.

Puerperal sepsis is often associated with  *Streptococcus pyogenes*, but numerous other bacteria can also be responsible. Examples include gram-positive bacterial (e.g.  *Streptococcus* spp.,  *Staphylococcus* spp., and  *Enterococcus* spp.), gram-negative bacteria (e.g.  *Chlamydia* spp.,  *Escherichia coli*,  *Klebsiella* spp., and  *Proteus* spp.), as well as anaerobes such as  *Peptostreptococcus* spp.,  *Bacteroides* spp., and  *Clostridium* spp. In cases caused by  *S. pyogenes*, the bacteria attach to host tissues using  **M protein** and produce a carbohydrate capsule to avoid phagocytosis.  *S. pyogenes* also produces a variety of  **exotoxin**s, like  **streptococcal pyrogenic exotoxin**s A and B, that are associated with virulence and may function as  **superantigen**s.

Diagnosis of puerperal fever is based on the timing and extent of fever and isolation, and identification of the etiologic agent in blood, wound, or urine specimens. Because there are numerous possible causes, antimicrobial susceptibility testing must be used to determine the best antibiotic for treatment. Nosocomial incidence of puerperal fever can be greatly reduced through the use of antiseptics during delivery and strict adherence to handwashing protocols by doctors, midwives, and nurses.
