index: hide
name: Bacterial Sepsis, Septic and Toxic Shock

At low concentrations, pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin 1 ( **IL-1**) and tumor necrosis factor-α ( **TNF-α**) play important roles in the host’s immune defenses. When they circulate systemically in larger amounts, however, the resulting immune response can be life threatening. IL-1 induces  **vasodilation** (widening of blood vessels) and reduces the tight junctions between vascular endothelial cells, leading to widespread  **edema**. As fluids move out of circulation into tissues, blood pressure begins to drop. If left unchecked, the blood pressure can fall below the level necessary to maintain proper kidney and respiratory functions, a condition known as  **septic shock**. In addition, the excessive release of cytokines during the inflammatory response can lead to the formation of  **blood clot**s. The loss of blood pressure and occurrence of blood clots can result in multiple organ failure and death.

Bacteria are the most common pathogens associated with the development of sepsis, and septic shock. The most common infection associated with  **sepsis** is  **bacterial pneumonia** (see <link:>), accounting for about half of all cases, followed by intra-abdominal infections (<link:>) and urinary tract infections (<link:>). Infections associated with superficial wounds, animal bites, and indwelling  **catheters** may also lead to sepsis and septic shock.

These initially minor, localized infections can be caused by a wide range of different bacteria, including  *Staphylococcus, Streptococcus*,  *Pseudomonas*,  *Pasteurella, Acinetobacter,* and members of the Enterobacteriaceae. However, if left untreated, infections by these gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens can potentially progress to sepsis, shock, and death.

## Toxic Shock Syndrome and Streptococcal Toxic Shock-Like Syndrome

Toxemia associated with infections caused by  **Staphylococcus aureus** can cause staphylococcal  **toxic shock syndrome (TSS)**. Some strains of  *S. aureus* produce a superantigen called toxic shock syndrome toxin-1 (TSST-1). TSS may occur as a complication of other localized or systemic infections such as  **pneumonia**,  **osteomyelitis**,  **sinusitis**, and skin wounds (surgical, traumatic, or burns). Those at highest risk for staphylococcal TSS are women with preexisting  *S. aureus* colonization of the vagina who leave tampons, contraceptive sponges, diaphragms, or other devices in the vagina for longer than the recommended time.

Staphylococcal TSS is characterized by sudden onset of vomiting, diarrhea, myalgia, body temperature higher than 38.9 °C (102.0 °F), and rapid-onset hypotension with a systolic blood pressure less than 90 mm Hg for adults; a diffuse erythematous rash that leads to peeling and shedding skin 1 to 2 weeks after onset; and additional involvement of three or more organ systems. The mortality rate associated with staphylococcal TSS is less than 3% of cases.

Diagnosis of staphylococcal TSS is based on clinical signs, symptoms, serologic tests to confirm bacterial species, and the detection of toxin production from staphylococcal isolates. Cultures of skin and blood are often negative; less than 5% are positive in cases of staphylococcal TSS. Treatment for staphylococcal TSS includes decontamination, debridement, vasopressors to elevate blood pressure, and antibiotic therapy with  **clindamycin** plus  **vancomycin** or  **daptomycin** pending susceptibility results.

A syndrome with signs and symptoms similar to staphylococcal TSS can be caused by  **Streptococcus pyogenes**. This condition, called  **streptococcal toxic shock-like syndrome (STSS)**, is characterized by more severe pathophysiology than staphylococcal TSS, with about 50% of patients developing  *S. pyogenes* bacteremia and  **necrotizing fasciitis**. In contrast to staphylococcal TSS, STSS is more likely to cause acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), a rapidly progressive disease characterized by fluid accumulation in the lungs that inhibits breathing and causes hypoxemia (low oxygen levels in the blood). STSS is associated with a higher mortality rate (20%–60%), even with aggressive therapy. STSS usually develops in patients with a streptococcal soft-tissue infection such as bacterial cellulitis,  **necrotizing fasciitis**,  **pyomyositis** (pus formation in muscle caused by infection), a recent  **influenza A** infection, or  **chickenpox**.
