index: hide
name: Osteomyelitis

Osteomyelitis is an inflammation of bone tissues most commonly caused by infection. These infections can either be acute or chronic and can involve a variety of different bacteria. The most common causative agent of  **osteomyelitis** is  *S. aureus*. However,  *M. tuberculosis*,  *Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus pyogenes*,  *S. agalactiae*, species in the Enterobacteriaceae *,* and other microorganisms can also cause osteomyelitis, depending on which bones are involved. In adults, bacteria usually gain direct access to the bone tissues through trauma or a surgical procedure involving  **prosthetic joints**. In children, the bacteria are often introduced from the bloodstream, possibly spreading from focal infections. The long bones, such as the femur, are more commonly affected in children because of the more extensive vascularization of bones in the young.

The signs and symptoms of osteomyelitis include fever, localized pain, swelling due to edema, and ulcers in soft tissues near the site of infection. The resulting inflammation can lead to tissue damage and bone loss. In addition, the infection may spread to joints, resulting in infectious arthritis, or disseminate into the blood, resulting in  **sepsis** and  **thrombosis** (formation of blood clots). Like septic arthritis, osteomyelitis is usually diagnosed using a combination of radiography, imaging, and identification of bacteria from blood cultures, or from bone cultures if blood cultures are negative. Parenteral antibiotic therapy is typically used to treat osteomyelitis. Because of the number of different possible etiologic agents, however, a variety of drugs might be used. Broad-spectrum antibacterial drugs such as  **nafcillin**,  **oxacillin**, or  **cephalosporin** are typically prescribed for acute osteomyelitis, and  **ampicillin** and  **piperacillin/tazobactam** for chronic osteomyelitis. In cases of antibiotic resistance,  **vancomycin** treatment is sometimes required to control the infection. In serious cases, surgery to remove the site of infection may be required. Other forms of treatment include  **hyperbaric oxygen therapy** (see <link:>) and implantation of antibiotic beads or pumps.
