index: hide
name: Plague

The gram-negative bacillus  **Yersinia pestis** causes the zoonotic infection  **plague**. This bacterium causes acute febrile disease in animals, usually rodents or other small mammals, and humans. The disease is associated with a high mortality rate if left untreated. Historically,  *Y. pestis* has been responsible for several devastating pandemics, resulting in millions of deaths (see ). There are three forms of plague:  **bubonic plague** (the most common form, accounting for about 80% of cases),  **pneumonic plague**, and  **septicemic plague**. These forms are differentiated by the mode of transmission and the initial site of infection. {'Figure_25_2_PlagueTran Figure 25.2.PlagueTran} illustrates these various modes of transmission and infection between animals and humans.

In bubonic plague,  *Y. pestis* is transferred by the bite of infected fleas. Since most flea bites occur on the legs and ankles,  *Y. pestis* is often introduced into the tissues and blood circulation in the lower extremities. After a 2- to 6-day incubation period, patients experience an abrupt onset fever (39.5–41 °C [103.1–105.8 °F]), headache, hypotension, and chills. The pathogen localizes in  **lymph nodes**, where it causes inflammation, swelling, and hemorrhaging that results in purple buboes ({'Figure_25_2_Necrosis Figure 25.2.Necrosis}). Buboes often form in lymph nodes of the groin first because these are the nodes associated with the lower limbs; eventually, through circulation in the blood and lymph, lymph nodes throughout the body become infected and form buboes. The average mortality rate for bubonic plague is about 55% if untreated and about 10% with antibiotic treatment.

Septicemic plague occurs when  *Y. pestis* is directly introduced into the bloodstream through a cut or wound and circulates through the body. The incubation period for septicemic plague is 1 to 3 days, after which patients develop fever, chills, extreme weakness, abdominal pain, and shock. Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) can also occur, resulting in the formation of  **thrombi** that obstruct blood vessels and promote  **ischemia** and  **necrosis** in surrounding tissues ({'Figure_25_2_Necrosis Figure 25.2.Necrosis}). Necrosis occurs most commonly in extremities such as fingers and toes, which become blackened. Septicemic plague can quickly lead to death, with a mortality rate near 100% when it is untreated. Even with antibiotic treatment, the mortality rate is about 50%.

Pneumonic plague occurs when  *Y. pestis* causes an infection of the lungs. This can occur through inhalation of aerosolized droplets from an infected individual or when the infection spreads to the lungs from elsewhere in the body in patients with bubonic or septicemic plague. After an incubation period of 1 to 3 days, signs and symptoms include fever, headache, weakness, and a rapidly developing pneumonia with shortness of breath, chest pain, and cough producing bloody or watery mucus. The pneumonia may result in rapid respiratory failure and shock. Pneumonic plague is the only form of plague that can be spread from person to person by infectious aerosol droplet. If untreated, the mortality rate is near 100%; with antibiotic treatment, the mortality rate is about 50%.


{image:'Figure_25_2_PlagueTran}
        


{image:'Figure_25_2_Necrosis}
        

The high mortality rate for the plague is, in part, a consequence of it being unusually well equipped with virulence factors. To date, there are at least 15 different major virulence factors that have been identified from  *Y. pestis* and, of these, eight are involved with adherence to host cells. In addition, the F1 component of the  *Y. pestis* capsule is a virulence factor that allows the bacterium to avoid phagocytosis. F1 is produced in large quantities during mammalian infection and is the most immunogenic component. Successful use of virulence factors allows the bacilli to disseminate from the area of the bite to regional lymph nodes and eventually the entire blood and lymphatic systems.

Culturing and direct microscopic examination of a sample of fluid from a bubo, blood, or sputum is the best way to identify  *Y. pestis* and confirm a presumptive diagnosis of plague. Specimens may be stained using either a Gram, Giemsa, Wright, or Wayson's staining technique ({'Figure_25_2_Wright Figure 25.2.Wright}). The bacteria show a characteristic bipolar staining pattern, resembling safety pins, that facilitates presumptive identification. Direct fluorescent antibody tests (rapid test of outer-membrane antigens) and serological tests like ELISA can be used to confirm the diagnosis. The confirmatory method for identifying  *Y. pestis* isolates in the US is bacteriophage lysis.

Prompt antibiotic therapy can resolve most cases of bubonic plague, but septicemic and pneumonic plague are more difficult to treat because of their shorter incubation stages. Survival often depends on an early and accurate diagnosis and an appropriate choice of antibiotic therapy. In the US, the most common antibiotics used to treat patients with plague are  **gentamicin**,  **fluoroquinolones**,  **streptomycin**,  **levofloxacin**,  **ciprofloxacin**, and  **doxycycline**.


{image:'Figure_25_2_Wright}
        
