index: hide
name: Pelvis

The pelvis consists of four bones: the right and left hip bones, the sacrum, and the coccyx (see {'Figure_8_3_1 Figure 8.3.1}). The pelvis has several important functions. Its primary role is to support the weight of the upper body when sitting and to transfer this weight to the lower limbs when standing. It serves as an attachment point for trunk and lower limb muscles, and also protects the internal pelvic organs. When standing in the anatomical position, the pelvis is tilted anteriorly. In this position, the anterior superior iliac spines and the pubic tubercles lie in the same vertical plane, and the anterior (internal) surface of the sacrum faces forward and downward.

The three areas of each hip bone, the ilium, pubis, and ischium, converge centrally to form a deep, cup-shaped cavity called the  **acetabulum**. This is located on the lateral side of the hip bone and is part of the hip joint. The large opening in the anteroinferior hip bone between the ischium and pubis is the  **obturator foramen**. This space is largely filled in by a layer of connective tissue and serves for the attachment of muscles on both its internal and external surfaces.

Several ligaments unite the bones of the pelvis ({'Figure_8_3_3 Figure 8.3.3}). The largely immobile sacroiliac joint is supported by a pair of strong ligaments that are attached between the sacrum and ilium portions of the hip bone. These are the  **anterior sacroiliac ligament** on the anterior side of the joint and the  **posterior sacroiliac ligament** on the posterior side. Also spanning the sacrum and hip bone are two additional ligaments. The  **sacrospinous ligament** runs from the sacrum to the ischial spine, and the  **sacrotuberous ligament** runs from the sacrum to the ischial tuberosity. These ligaments help to support and immobilize the sacrum as it carries the weight of the body.


{image:'Figure_8_3_3}
        

The sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments also help to define two openings on the posterolateral sides of the pelvis through which muscles, nerves, and blood vessels for the lower limb exit. The superior opening is the  **greater sciatic foramen**. This large opening is formed by the greater sciatic notch of the hip bone, the sacrum, and the sacrospinous ligament. The smaller, more inferior  **lesser sciatic foramen** is formed by the lesser sciatic notch of the hip bone, together with the sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments.

The space enclosed by the bony pelvis is divided into two regions ({'Figure_8_3_4 Figure 8.3.4}). The broad, superior region, defined laterally by the large, fan-like portion of the upper hip bone, is called the  **greater pelvis** (greater pelvic cavity; false pelvis). This broad area is occupied by portions of the small and large intestines, and because it is more closely associated with the abdominal cavity, it is sometimes referred to as the false pelvis. More inferiorly, the narrow, rounded space of the  **lesser pelvis** (lesser pelvic cavity; true pelvis) contains the bladder and other pelvic organs, and thus is also known as the true pelvis. The  **pelvic brim** (also known as the  **pelvic inlet**) forms the superior margin of the lesser pelvis, separating it from the greater pelvis. The pelvic brim is defined by a line formed by the upper margin of the pubic symphysis anteriorly, and the pectineal line of the pubis, the arcuate line of the ilium, and the sacral promontory (the anterior margin of the superior sacrum) posteriorly. The inferior limit of the lesser pelvic cavity is called the  **pelvic outlet**. This large opening is defined by the inferior margin of the pubic symphysis anteriorly, and the ischiopubic ramus, the ischial tuberosity, the sacrotuberous ligament, and the inferior tip of the coccyx posteriorly. Because of the anterior tilt of the pelvis, the lesser pelvis is also angled, giving it an anterosuperior (pelvic inlet) to posteroinferior (pelvic outlet) orientation.


{image:'Figure_8_3_4}
        

## Comparison of the Female and Male Pelvis

The differences between the adult female and male pelvis relate to function and body size. In general, the bones of the male pelvis are thicker and heavier, adapted for support of the male’s heavier physical build and stronger muscles. The greater sciatic notch of the male hip bone is narrower and deeper than the broader notch of females. Because the female pelvis is adapted for childbirth, it is wider than the male pelvis, as evidenced by the distance between the anterior superior iliac spines (see {'Figure_8_3_4 Figure 8.3.4}). The ischial tuberosities of females are also farther apart, which increases the size of the pelvic outlet. Because of this increased pelvic width, the subpubic angle is larger in females (greater than 80 degrees) than it is in males (less than 70 degrees). The female sacrum is wider, shorter, and less curved, and the sacral promontory projects less into the pelvic cavity, thus giving the female pelvic inlet (pelvic brim) a more rounded or oval shape compared to males. The lesser pelvic cavity of females is also wider and more shallow than the narrower, deeper, and tapering lesser pelvis of males. Because of the obvious differences between female and male hip bones, this is the one bone of the body that allows for the most accurate sex determination.  provides an overview of the general differences between the female and male pelvis.


****

|  | Female pelvis | Male pelvis |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **Pelvic weight** | Bones of the pelvis are lighter and thinner | Bones of the pelvis are thicker and heavier |
|  **Pelvic inlet shape** | Pelvic inlet has a round or oval shape | Pelvic inlet is heart-shaped |
|  **Lesser pelvic cavity shape** | Lesser pelvic cavity is shorter and wider | Lesser pelvic cavity is longer and narrower |
|  **Subpubic angle** | Subpubic angle is greater than 80 degrees | Subpubic angle is less than 70 degrees |
|  **Pelvic outlet shape** | Pelvic outlet is rounded and larger | Pelvic outlet is smaller |
    
