index: hide
name: The Punnett Square Approach for a Monohybrid Cross

When fertilization occurs between two true-breeding parents that differ in only one characteristic, the process is called a  **monohybrid** cross, and the resulting offspring are monohybrids. Mendel performed seven monohybrid crosses involving contrasting traits for each characteristic. On the basis of his results in F<sub>1</sub> and F<sub>2</sub> generations, Mendel postulated that each parent in the monohybrid cross contributed one of two paired unit factors to each offspring, and every possible combination of unit factors was equally likely.

To demonstrate a monohybrid cross, consider the case of true-breeding pea plants with yellow versus green pea seeds. The dominant seed color is yellow; therefore, the parental genotypes were  *YY* for the plants with yellow seeds and  *yy* for the plants with green seeds, respectively. A  **Punnett square**, devised by the British geneticist Reginald Punnett, can be drawn that applies the rules of probability to predict the possible outcomes of a genetic cross or mating and their expected frequencies. To prepare a Punnett square, all possible combinations of the parental alleles are listed along the top (for one parent) and side (for the other parent) of a grid, representing their meiotic segregation into haploid gametes. Then the combinations of egg and sperm are made in the boxes in the table to show which alleles are combining. Each box then represents the diploid genotype of a zygote, or fertilized egg, that could result from this mating. Because each possibility is equally likely, genotypic ratios can be determined from a Punnett square. If the pattern of inheritance (dominant or recessive) is known, the phenotypic ratios can be inferred as well. For a monohybrid cross of two true-breeding parents, each parent contributes one type of allele. In this case, only one genotype is possible. All offspring are  *Yy* and have yellow seeds ().


{image:'Figure_12_2_2}
        

A self-cross of one of the  *Yy* heterozygous offspring can be represented in a 2 × 2 Punnett square because each parent can donate one of two different alleles. Therefore, the offspring can potentially have one of four allele combinations:  *YY*,  *Yy*,  *yY*, or  *yy* (). Notice that there are two ways to obtain the  *Yy* genotype: a  *Y* from the egg and a  *y* from the sperm, or a  *y* from the egg and a  *Y* from the sperm. Both of these possibilities must be counted. Recall that Mendel’s pea-plant characteristics behaved in the same way in reciprocal crosses. Therefore, the two possible heterozygous combinations produce offspring that are genotypically and phenotypically identical despite their dominant and recessive alleles deriving from different parents. They are grouped together. Because fertilization is a random event, we expect each combination to be equally likely and for the offspring to exhibit a ratio of  *YY*: *Yy*: *yy* genotypes of 1:2:1 (). Furthermore, because the  *YY* and  *Yy* offspring have yellow seeds and are phenotypically identical, applying the sum rule of probability, we expect the offspring to exhibit a phenotypic ratio of 3 yellow:1 green. Indeed, working with large sample sizes, Mendel observed approximately this ratio in every F<sub>2</sub> generation resulting from crosses for individual traits.

Mendel validated these results by performing an F<sub>3</sub> cross in which he self-crossed the dominant- and recessive-expressing F<sub>2</sub> plants. When he self-crossed the plants expressing green seeds, all of the offspring had green seeds, confirming that all green seeds had homozygous genotypes of  *yy*. When he self-crossed the F<sub>2</sub> plants expressing yellow seeds, he found that one-third of the plants bred true, and two-thirds of the plants segregated at a 3:1 ratio of yellow:green seeds. In this case, the true-breeding plants had homozygous ( *YY*) genotypes, whereas the segregating plants corresponded to the heterozygous ( *Yy*) genotype. When these plants self-fertilized, the outcome was just like the F<sub>1</sub> self-fertilizing cross.

## The Test Cross Distinguishes the Dominant Phenotype

Beyond predicting the offspring of a cross between known homozygous or heterozygous parents, Mendel also developed a way to determine whether an organism that expressed a dominant trait was a heterozygote or a homozygote. Called the  **test cross**, this technique is still used by plant and animal breeders. In a test cross, the dominant-expressing organism is crossed with an organism that is homozygous recessive for the same characteristic. If the dominant-expressing organism is a homozygote, then all F<sub>1</sub> offspring will be heterozygotes expressing the dominant trait (). Alternatively, if the dominant expressing organism is a heterozygote, the F<sub>1</sub> offspring will exhibit a 1:1 ratio of heterozygotes and recessive homozygotes (). The test cross further validates Mendel’s postulate that pairs of unit factors segregate equally.

Many human diseases are genetically inherited. A healthy person in a family in which some members suffer from a recessive genetic disorder may want to know if he or she has the disease-causing gene and what risk exists of passing the disorder on to his or her offspring. Of course, doing a test cross in humans is unethical and impractical. Instead, geneticists use  **pedigree analysis** to study the inheritance pattern of human genetic diseases ().
