index: hide
name: Phenotypes and Genotypes

Two alleles for a given gene in a diploid organism are expressed and interact to produce physical characteristics. The observable traits expressed by an organism are referred to as its  **phenotype**. An organism’s underlying genetic makeup, consisting of both physically visible and non-expressed alleles, is called its  **genotype**. Mendel’s hybridization experiments demonstrate the difference between phenotype and genotype. When true-breeding plants in which one parent had yellow pods and one had green pods were cross-fertilized, all of the F<sub>1</sub> hybrid offspring had yellow pods. That is, the hybrid offspring were phenotypically identical to the true-breeding parent with yellow pods. However, we know that the allele donated by the parent with green pods was not simply lost because it reappeared in some of the F<sub>2</sub> offspring. Therefore, the F<sub>1</sub> plants must have been genotypically different from the parent with yellow pods.

The P<sub>1</sub> plants that Mendel used in his experiments were each homozygous for the trait he was studying. Diploid organisms that are  **homozygous** at a given gene, or locus, have two identical alleles for that gene on their homologous chromosomes. Mendel’s parental pea plants always bred true because both of the gametes produced carried the same trait. When P<sub>1</sub> plants with contrasting traits were cross-fertilized, all of the offspring were  **heterozygous** for the contrasting trait, meaning that their genotype reflected that they had different alleles for the gene being examined.

## Dominant and Recessive Alleles

Our discussion of homozygous and heterozygous organisms brings us to why the F<sub>1</sub> heterozygous offspring were identical to one of the parents, rather than expressing both alleles. In all seven pea-plant characteristics, one of the two contrasting alleles was dominant, and the other was recessive. Mendel called the dominant allele the expressed unit factor; the recessive allele was referred to as the latent unit factor. We now know that these so-called unit factors are actually genes on homologous chromosome pairs. For a gene that is expressed in a dominant and recessive pattern, homozygous dominant and heterozygous organisms will look identical (that is, they will have different genotypes but the same phenotype). The recessive allele will only be observed in homozygous recessive individuals ().


****

| Dominant Traits | Recessive Traits |
|:-:|:-:|
| Achondroplasia | Albinism |
| Brachydactyly | Cystic fibrosis |
| Huntington’s disease | Duchenne muscular dystrophy |
| Marfan syndrome | Galactosemia |
| Neurofibromatosis | Phenylketonuria |
| Widow’s peak | Sickle-cell anemia |
| Wooly hair | Tay-Sachs disease |
    

Several conventions exist for referring to genes and alleles. For the purposes of this chapter, we will abbreviate genes using the first letter of the gene’s corresponding dominant trait. For example, violet is the dominant trait for a pea plant’s flower color, so the flower-color gene would be abbreviated as  *V* (note that it is customary to italicize gene designations). Furthermore, we will use uppercase and lowercase letters to represent dominant and recessive alleles, respectively. Therefore, we would refer to the genotype of a homozygous dominant pea plant with violet flowers as  *VV*, a homozygous recessive pea plant with white flowers as  *vv*, and a heterozygous pea plant with violet flowers as  *Vv*.
