index: hide
name: Alternatives to Dominance and Recessiveness

Mendel’s experiments with pea plants suggested that: (1) two “units” or alleles exist for every gene; (2) alleles maintain their integrity in each generation (no blending); and (3) in the presence of the dominant allele, the recessive allele is hidden and makes no contribution to the phenotype. Therefore, recessive alleles can be “carried” and not expressed by individuals. Such heterozygous individuals are sometimes referred to as “carriers.” Further genetic studies in other plants and animals have shown that much more complexity exists, but that the fundamental principles of Mendelian genetics still hold true. In the sections to follow, we consider some of the extensions of Mendelism. If Mendel had chosen an experimental system that exhibited these genetic complexities, it’s possible that he would not have understood what his results meant.

## Incomplete Dominance

Mendel’s results, that traits are inherited as dominant and recessive pairs, contradicted the view at that time that offspring exhibited a blend of their parents’ traits. However, the heterozygote phenotype occasionally does appear to be intermediate between the two parents. For example, in the snapdragon,  *Antirrhinum majus* ({'Figure_12_2_4 Figure 12.2.4}), a cross between a homozygous parent with white flowers ( *CWCW*) and a homozygous parent with red flowers ( *CRCR*) will produce offspring with pink flowers ( *CRCW*). (Note that different genotypic abbreviations are used for Mendelian extensions to distinguish these patterns from simple dominance and recessiveness.) This pattern of inheritance is described as  **incomplete dominance**, denoting the expression of two contrasting alleles such that the individual displays an intermediate phenotype. The allele for red flowers is incompletely dominant over the allele for white flowers. However, the results of a heterozygote self-cross can still be predicted, just as with Mendelian dominant and recessive crosses. In this case, the genotypic ratio would be 1  *CRCR*:2  *CRCW*:1  *CWCW*, and the phenotypic ratio would be 1:2:1 for red:pink:white.


{image:'Figure_12_2_4}
        

## Codominance

A variation on incomplete dominance is  **codominance**, in which both alleles for the same characteristic are simultaneously expressed in the heterozygote. An example of codominance is the MN blood groups of humans. The M and N alleles are expressed in the form of an M or N antigen present on the surface of red blood cells. Homozygotes ( *LMLM* and  *LNLN*) express either the M or the N allele, and heterozygotes ( *LMLN*) express both alleles equally. In a self-cross between heterozygotes expressing a codominant trait, the three possible offspring genotypes are phenotypically distinct. However, the 1:2:1 genotypic ratio characteristic of a Mendelian monohybrid cross still applies.

## Multiple Alleles

Mendel implied that only two alleles, one dominant and one recessive, could exist for a given gene. We now know that this is an oversimplification. Although individual humans (and all diploid organisms) can only have two alleles for a given gene, multiple alleles may exist at the population level such that many combinations of two alleles are observed. Note that when many alleles exist for the same gene, the convention is to denote the most common phenotype or genotype among wild animals as the  **wild type** (often abbreviated “+”); this is considered the standard or norm. All other phenotypes or genotypes are considered  **variants** of this standard, meaning that they deviate from the wild type. The variant may be recessive or dominant to the wild-type allele.

An example of multiple alleles is coat color in rabbits ({'Figure_12_2_5 Figure 12.2.5}). Here, four alleles exist for the  *c* gene. The wild-type version,  *C+C+*, is expressed as brown fur. The chinchilla phenotype,  *cchcch*, is expressed as black-tipped white fur. The Himalayan phenotype,  *chch*, has black fur on the extremities and white fur elsewhere. Finally, the albino, or “colorless” phenotype,  *cc*, is expressed as white fur. In cases of multiple alleles, dominance hierarchies can exist. In this case, the wild-type allele is dominant over all the others, chinchilla is incompletely dominant over Himalayan and albino, and Himalayan is dominant over albino. This hierarchy, or allelic series, was revealed by observing the phenotypes of each possible heterozygote offspring.


{image:'Figure_12_2_5}
        

The complete dominance of a wild-type phenotype over all other mutants often occurs as an effect of “dosage” of a specific gene product, such that the wild-type allele supplies the correct amount of gene product whereas the mutant alleles cannot. For the allelic series in rabbits, the wild-type allele may supply a given dosage of fur pigment, whereas the mutants supply a lesser dosage or none at all. Interestingly, the Himalayan phenotype is the result of an allele that produces a temperature-sensitive gene product that only produces pigment in the cooler extremities of the rabbit’s body.

Alternatively, one mutant allele can be dominant over all other phenotypes, including the wild type. This may occur when the mutant allele somehow interferes with the genetic message so that even a heterozygote with one wild-type allele copy expresses the mutant phenotype. One way in which the mutant allele can interfere is by enhancing the function of the wild-type gene product or changing its distribution in the body. One example of this is the  *Antennapedia* mutation in  *Drosophila* ({'Figure_12_2_6 Figure 12.2.6}). In this case, the mutant allele expands the distribution of the gene product, and as a result, the  *Antennapedia* heterozygote develops legs on its head where its antennae should be.


{image:'Figure_12_2_6}
        

## X-Linked Traits

In humans, as well as in many other animals and some plants, the sex of the individual is determined by sex chromosomes. The sex chromosomes are one pair of non-homologous chromosomes. Until now, we have only considered inheritance patterns among non-sex chromosomes, or  **autosomes**. In addition to 22 homologous pairs of autosomes, human females have a homologous pair of X chromosomes, whereas human males have an XY chromosome pair. Although the Y chromosome contains a small region of similarity to the X chromosome so that they can pair during meiosis, the Y chromosome is much shorter and contains many fewer genes. When a gene being examined is present on the X chromosome, but not on the Y chromosome, it is said to be  **X-linked**.

Eye color in  *Drosophila* was one of the first X-linked traits to be identified. Thomas Hunt Morgan mapped this trait to the X chromosome in 1910. Like humans,  *Drosophila* males have an XY chromosome pair, and females are XX. In flies, the wild-type eye color is red (X<sup>W</sup>) and it is dominant to white eye color (X<sup>w</sup>) ({'Figure_12_2_8 Figure 12.2.8}). Because of the location of the eye-color gene, reciprocal crosses do not produce the same offspring ratios. Males are said to be  **hemizygous**, because they have only one allele for any X-linked characteristic. Hemizygosity makes the descriptions of dominance and recessiveness irrelevant for XY males.  *Drosophila* males lack a second allele copy on the Y chromosome; that is, their genotype can only be X<sup>W</sup>Y or X<sup>w</sup>Y. In contrast, females have two allele copies of this gene and can be X<sup>W</sup>X<sup>W</sup>, X<sup>W</sup>X<sup>w</sup>, or X<sup>w</sup>X<sup>w</sup>.


{image:'Figure_12_2_8}
        

In an X-linked cross, the genotypes of F<sub>1</sub> and F<sub>2</sub> offspring depend on whether the recessive trait was expressed by the male or the female in the P<sub>1</sub> generation. With regard to  *Drosophila* eye color, when the P<sub>1</sub> male expresses the white-eye phenotype and the female is homozygous red-eyed, all members of the F<sub>1</sub> generation exhibit red eyes (). The F<sub>1</sub> females are heterozygous (X *W*X *w*), and the males are all X *W*Y, having received their X chromosome from the homozygous dominant P<sub>1</sub> female and their Y chromosome from the P<sub>1</sub> male. A subsequent cross between the X *W*X *w* female and the X *W*Y ** male would produce only red-eyed females (with X *W*X *W* or X *W*X *w* genotypes) and both red- and white-eyed males (with X *W*Y ** or X *w*Y ** genotypes). Now, consider a cross between a homozygous white-eyed female and a male with red eyes. The F<sub>1</sub> generation would exhibit only heterozygous red-eyed females (X *W*X *w*) and only white-eyed males (X *w*Y). Half of the F<sub>2</sub> females would be red-eyed (X *W*X *w*) and half would be white-eyed (X *w*X *w*). Similarly, half of the F<sub>2</sub> males would be red-eyed (X *W*Y) and half would be white-eyed (X *w*Y).

Discoveries in fruit fly genetics can be applied to human genetics.  When a female parent is homozygous for a recessive X-linked trait, she will pass the trait on to 100 percent of her offspring. Her male offspring are, therefore, destined to express the trait, as they will inherit their father's Y chromosome. In humans, the alleles for certain conditions (some forms of color blindness, hemophilia, and muscular dystrophy) are X-linked. Females who are heterozygous for these diseases are said to be carriers and may not exhibit any phenotypic effects. These females will pass the disease to half of their sons and will pass carrier status to half of their daughters; therefore, recessive X-linked traits appear more frequently in males than females.

In some groups of organisms with sex chromosomes, the sex with the non-homologous sex chromosomes is the female rather than the male. This is the case for all birds. In this case, sex-linked traits will be more likely to appear in the female, in which they are hemizygous.

## Human Sex-linked Disorders

Sex-linkage studies in Morgan’s laboratory provided the fundamentals for understanding X-linked recessive disorders in humans, which include red-green color blindness, and Types A and B hemophilia. Because human males need to inherit only one recessive mutant X allele to be affected, X-linked disorders are disproportionately observed in males. Females must inherit recessive X-linked alleles from both of their parents in order to express the trait. When they inherit one recessive X-linked mutant allele and one dominant X-linked wild-type allele, they are carriers of the trait and are typically unaffected. Carrier females can manifest mild forms of the trait due to the inactivation of the dominant allele located on one of the X chromosomes. However, female carriers can contribute the trait to their sons, resulting in the son exhibiting the trait, or they can contribute the recessive allele to their daughters, resulting in the daughters being carriers of the trait ({'Figure_13_1_5 Figure 13.1.5}). Although some Y-linked recessive disorders exist, typically they are associated with infertility in males and are therefore not transmitted to subsequent generations.


{image:'Figure_13_1_5}
        

## Lethality

A large proportion of genes in an individual’s genome are essential for survival. Occasionally, a nonfunctional allele for an essential gene can arise by mutation and be transmitted in a population as long as individuals with this allele also have a wild-type, functional copy. The wild-type allele functions at a capacity sufficient to sustain life and is therefore considered to be dominant over the nonfunctional allele. However, consider two heterozygous parents that have a genotype of wild-type/nonfunctional mutant for a hypothetical essential gene. In one quarter of their offspring, we would expect to observe individuals that are homozygous recessive for the nonfunctional allele. Because the gene is essential, these individuals might fail to develop past fertilization, die  *in utero*, or die later in life, depending on what life stage requires this gene. An inheritance pattern in which an allele is only lethal in the homozygous form and in which the heterozygote may be normal or have some altered non-lethal phenotype is referred to as  **recessive lethal**.

For crosses between heterozygous individuals with a recessive lethal allele that causes death before birth when homozygous, only wild-type homozygotes and heterozygotes would be observed. The genotypic ratio would therefore be 2:1. In other instances, the recessive lethal allele might also exhibit a dominant (but not lethal) phenotype in the heterozygote. For instance, the recessive lethal  *Curly* allele in  *Drosophila* affects wing shape in the heterozygote form but is lethal in the homozygote.

A single copy of the wild-type allele is not always sufficient for normal functioning or even survival. The  **dominant lethal** inheritance pattern is one in which an allele is lethal both in the homozygote and the heterozygote; this allele can only be transmitted if the lethality phenotype occurs after reproductive age. Individuals with mutations that result in dominant lethal alleles fail to survive even in the heterozygote form. Dominant lethal alleles are very rare because, as you might expect, the allele only lasts one generation and is not transmitted. However, just as the recessive lethal allele might not immediately manifest the phenotype of death, dominant lethal alleles also might not be expressed until adulthood. Once the individual reaches reproductive age, the allele may be unknowingly passed on, resulting in a delayed death in both generations. An example of this in humans is Huntington’s disease, in which the nervous system gradually wastes away ({'Figure_12_2_10 Figure 12.2.10}). People who are heterozygous for the dominant Huntington allele ( *Hh*) will inevitably develop the fatal disease. However, the onset of Huntington’s disease may not occur until age 40, at which point the afflicted persons may have already passed the allele to 50 percent of their offspring.


{image:'Figure_12_2_10}
        
