index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Aerobic and anaerobic environments can be found in diverse niches throughout nature, including different sites within and on the human body.
  * Microorganisms vary in their requirements for molecular oxygen.  **Obligate aerobes** depend on aerobic respiration and use oxygen as a terminal electron acceptor. They cannot grow without oxygen.
  *  **Obligate anaerobes** cannot grow in the presence of oxygen. They depend on fermentation and anaerobic respiration using a final electron acceptor other than oxygen.
  *  **Facultative anaerobes** show better growth in the presence of oxygen but will also grow without it.
  * Although  **aerotolerant anaerobes** do not perform aerobic respiration, they can grow in the presence of oxygen. Most aerotolerant anaerobes test negative for the enzyme  **catalase**.
  *  **Microaerophiles** need oxygen to grow, albeit at a lower concentration than 21% oxygen in air.
  *  **Optimum oxygen concentration** for an organism is the oxygen level that promotes the fastest growth rate. The  **minimum permissive oxygen concentration** and the  **maximum permissive oxygen concentration** are, respectively, the lowest and the highest oxygen levels that the organism will tolerate.
  *  **Peroxidase**,  **superoxide dismutase**, and  **catalase** are the main enzymes involved in the detoxification of the  **reactive oxygen species**. Superoxide dismutase is usually present in a cell that can tolerate oxygen. All three enzymes are usually detectable in cells that perform aerobic respiration and produce more ROS.
  * A  **capnophile** is an organism that requires a higher than atmospheric concentration of CO<sub>2</sub> to grow.
