index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.3.2
title: 8.3.3.2 - Stratospheric Ozone

The decreases in stratospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} due to {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of ODSs have a positive RF in the shortwave (increasing the flux into the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere}) and a negative RF in the longwave. This leaves a residual {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} that is the difference of two larger terms. In the lower {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} the longwave effect tends to be larger, whereas in the upper stratosphere the shortwave dominates. Thus whether stratospheric ozone depletion has contributed an overall net positive or negative forcing depends on the vertical profile of the change ({cite.8.'Forster_and_Shine_1997}). {cite.8.'WMO_2011 WMO (2011)} assessed the RF from 1979 to 2005 from observed ozone changes ({cite.8.'Randel_and_Wu_2007}) and results from 16 models for the 1970s average to 2004. The observed and modelled mean ozone changes gave RF values of different signs (see {'Table_8_3 Table 8.3}). Negative net RFs arise from models with ozone decline in the lowermost stratosphere, particularly at or near the {Glossary.*Tropopause tropopause}.

The ACCMIP study also included some models with stratospheric chemistry ({cite.8.'Conley_et_al_2013}). One model in that study stood out as having excessive ozone depletion. Removing that model leaves a stratospheric ozone RF of –0.02 (–0.09 to 0.05) W m–2. These results are in good agreement with the model studies from {cite.8.'WMO_2011 WMO (2011)}. {cite.8.'Forster_et_al_2007 Forster et al. (2007)} in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} calculated a forcing of –0.05 W m–2 from observations over the period 1979–1998 and increased the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} to 0.10 W m–2 to encompass changes between the pre-industrial period and 2005. The RF from stratospheric ozone due to changes in emissions of ozone {Glossary.*Precursors precursors} and ODSs is here assessed to be –0.05 (–0.15 to 0.05) taking into account all the studies listed in {'Table_8_3 Table 8.3}. This is in agreement with AR4, although derived from different data. The timeline of stratospheric ozone forcing is shown in {'Figure_8_7 Figure 8.7}, making the assumption that it follows the trajectory of the changes in EESC. It reaches a minimum in the late 1990s and starts to recover after that.

The net global RF from ODSs taking into account the compensating effects on ozone and their direct effects as {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs} is 0.18 (0.03 to 0.33) W m–2. The patterns of RF for these two effects are different so the small net global RF comprises areas of positive and negative RF.
