index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * The DNA replication process is  **semiconservative**, which results in two DNA molecules, each having one parental strand of DNA and one newly synthesized strand.
  * In bacteria, the  **initiation of replication** occurs at the  **origin of replication**, where  **supercoiled** DNA is unwound by  **DNA gyrase**, made single-stranded by  **helicase**, and bound by  **single-stranded binding protein** to maintain its single-stranded state.  **Primase** synthesizes a short RNA  **primer**, providing a free 3’-OH group to which  **DNA polymerase III** can add DNA nucleotides.
  * During  **elongation**, the  **leading strand** of DNA is synthesized continuously from a single primer. The  **lagging strand** is synthesized discontinuously in short  **Okazaki fragments**, each requiring its own primer. The RNA primers are removed and replaced with DNA nucleotides by bacterial  **DNA polymerase I**, and  **DNA ligase** seals the gaps between these fragments.
  *  **Termination** of replication in bacteria involves the resolution of circular DNA concatemers by topoisomerase IV to release the two copies of the circular chromosome.
  * Eukaryotes typically have multiple linear chromosomes, each with multiple origins of replication. Overall, replication in eukaryotes is similar to that in prokaryotes.
  * The linear nature of eukaryotic chromosomes necessitates  **telomeres** to protect genes near the end of the chromosomes.  **Telomerase** extends telomeres, preventing their degradation, in some cell types.
  *  **Rolling circle replication** is a type of rapid unidirectional DNA synthesis of a circular DNA molecule used for the replication of some plasmids.
