index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.4.2.2
title: 8.4.2.2 - Recent Eruptions

The background stratospheric {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} concentration was affected by several small eruptions in the first decade of the 21st century ({cite.8.'Nagai_et_al_2010}; {cite.8.'Vernier_et_al_2011}; {cite.8.'Neely_et_al_2013}; see also {'Figure_8_13 Figure 8.13}), with a very small contribution from tropospheric pollution ({cite.8.'Siddaway_and_Petelina_2011}; {cite.8.'Vernier_et_al_2011}), and had a small impact on {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF} ({cite.8.'Solomon_et_al_2011}). Two recent high-latitude eruptions, of Kasatochi Volcano (52.1°N, 175.3°W) on August 8, 2008 and of Sarychev Volcano (48.1°N, 153.2°E) on June 12–16, 2009, each injected ~1.5 Tg(SO2) into the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere}, but did not produce detectable {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response}. Their eruptions, however, led to better understanding of the dependence of the amount of material and time of year of high-latitude injections to produce climate impacts ({cite.8.'Haywood_et_al_2010}; {cite.8.'Kravitz_et_al_2010}, 2011). The RF from high-latitude eruptions is a function of seasonal distribution of {Glossary.*Insolation insolation} and the 3to 4-month {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} of high-latitude volcanic aerosols. {cite.8.'Kravitz_and_Robock_2011 Kravitz and Robock (2011)} showed that high-latitude eruptions must inject at least 5 Tg(SO2) into the lower stratosphere in the spring or summer, and much more in fall or winter, to have a detectible climatic response.

{image:'Figure_8_13}

On April 14, 2010 the Eyjafjallajökull volcano in Iceland (63.6°N, 19.6°W) began an explosive eruption phase that shut down air traffic in Europe for 6 days and continued to disrupt it for another month. The climatic impact of Eyjafjallajökull was about 10,000 times less than that of Mt Pinatubo; however, because it emitted less than 50 ktonnes SO2 and its lifetime in the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} was 50 times less than if it had been injected into the stratosphere, and was therefore undetectable amidst the {Glossary.*Chaotic chaotic} weather noise in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} ({cite.8.'Robock_2010}). 2011 saw the continuation of a number of small eruptions with significant tropospheric SO2 and ash injections, including Puyehue-Cordón Caulle in Chile, Nabro in Eritrea, and Grimsvötn in Iceland. None have been shown to have produced an important RF, but the June 13, 2011 Nabro eruption resulted in the largest stratospheric aerosol cloud since the 1991 Mt Pinatubo eruption ({cite.8.'Bourassa_et_al_2012}), more than 1.5 Tg(SO2).

{'Figure_8_12 Figure 8.12} shows reconstructions of volcanic aerosol optical depth since 1750. {'Figure_8_13 Figure 8.13} shows details of the vertical distribution of stratospheric aerosols in the tropics since 1985. The numerous small eruptions in the past decade are evident, but some of them were at higher latitudes and their full extent is not captured in this plot.
