index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Helminths often cause intestinal infections after transmission to humans through exposure to contaminated soil, water, or food. Signs and symptoms are often mild, but severe complications may develop in some cases.
  *  *Ascaris lumbricoides* eggs are transmitted through contaminated food or water and hatch in the intestine. Juvenile larvae travel to the lungs and then to the pharynx, where they are swallowed and returned to the intestines to mature. These nematode roundworms cause  **ascariasis**.
  *  *Necator americanus* and  *Ancylostoma doudenale* cause  **hookworm infection** when larvae penetrate the skin from soil contaminated by dog or cat feces. They travel to the lungs and are then swallowed to mature in the intestines.
  *  *Strongyloides stercoralis* are transmitted from soil through the skin to the lungs and then to the intestine where they cause  **strongyloidiasis**.
  *  *Enterobius vermicularis* are nematode pinworms transmitted by the fecal-oral route. After ingestion, they travel to the colon where they cause  **enterobiasis**.
  *  *Trichuris trichiura* can be transmitted through soil or fecal contamination and cause  **trichuriasis**. After ingestion, the eggs travel to the intestine where the larvae emerge and mature, attaching to the walls of the colon and cecum.
  *  *Trichinella* spp. is transmitted through undercooked meat. Larvae in the meat emerge from cysts and mature in the large intestine. They can migrate to the muscles and form new cysts, causing  **trichinosis**.
  *  *Taenia* spp. and  *Diphyllobothrium latum* are tapeworms transmitted through undercooked food or the fecal-oral route.  *Taenia* infections cause  **taeniasis**. Tapeworms use their scolex to attach to the intestinal wall. Larvae may also move to muscle or brain tissue.
  *  *Echinococcus granulosus* is a cestode transmitted through eggs in the feces of infected animals, especially dogs. After ingestion, eggs hatch in the small intestine, and the larvae invade the intestinal wall and travel through the circulatory system to form dangerous cysts in internal organs, causing  **hydatid disease**.
  * Flukes are transmitted through aquatic plants or fish.  **Liver flukes** cause disease by interfering with the bile duct.  **Intestinal flukes** develop in the intestines, where they attach to the intestinal epithelium.
