index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.2.1
title: 12.4.2.1 - Definition and Use

In this chapter we show geographical patterns of projected changes in climate variables according to specific {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} and time horizons. Alternative scenarios and {Glossary.*Projection projection} times can be inferred from those shown by using some established approximation methods. This is especially the case for large-scale regional patterns of average temperature and—with additional caveats—precipitation changes. In fact, ‘pattern scaling’ is an approximation that has been explicitly suggested in the description of the {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} ({cite.12.'Moss_et_al_2010}) as a method for deriving impact-relevant regional {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} for scenarios that have not been simulated by global and {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} models. It was first proposed by {cite.12.'Santer_et_al_1990 Santer et al. (1990)} and revisited later by numerous studies (e.g., {cite.12.'Huntingford_and_Cox_2000}). It relies on the existence of robust geographical patterns of change, emerging at the time when the response to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcings} emerges from the noise, and persisting across the length of the simulation, across different scenarios, and even across models, modulated by the corresponding changes in global average temperature. The robustness of temperature change patterns has been amply documented from the original paper onward. An example is given in {'Figure_12_9 Figure 12.9} for surface air temperature from each of the CMIP5 models highlighting both similarities and differences between the responses of different models. The precipitation pattern was shown to scale linearly with global average temperature to a sufficient accuracy in CMIP3 models ({cite.12.'Neelin_et_al_2006}) for this to be useful for projections related to the {Glossary.*Hydrological_cycle hydrological cycle}. {cite.12.'Shiogama_et_al_2010b Shiogama et al. (2010b)} find similar results with the caution that in the early stages of warming aerosols modify the pattern. A more mixed evaluation can be found in {cite.12.'Good_et_al_2012 Good et al. (2012)}, where some land areas in the low latitudes exhibit a nonlinear relation to global average temperature, but, largely, average precipitation change over the remaining regions can be well approximated by a grid-point specific linear function of global average temperature change. It is in the latter quantity that the dependence of the evolution of the change in time on the model (e.g., its {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity}) and the forcing (e.g., the {Glossary.*Emission_scenario emission scenario}) is encapsulated.

{image:'Figure_12_9}

In analytical terms, it is assumed that the following relation holds:

C (t,x) = TG(t) c(x) + R (t, x)

where the symbol x identifies the geographic location (model grid point or other spatial coordinates) and possibly the time of year (e.g., a June–July–August average). The index t runs along the length of the forcing scenario of interest. TG(t) indicates global average temperature change at time t under this scenario; c(x) is the time-invariant geographic pattern of change per 1°C global {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} change for the variable of interest (which represents the forced component of the change) and C (t,x) is the actual field of change for that variable at the specific time t under this scenario. The R (t, x) is a residual term and highlights the fact that pattern scaling cannot reconstruct model behaviour with complete accuracy due to both natural variability and because of limitations of the methodology discussed below. This way, regionally and temporally differentiated results under different scenarios or climate sensitivities can be approximated by the product of a spatial pattern, constant over time, scenario and model characteristics, and a time evolving global mean change in temperature. Model and scenario dependence are thus captured through the global mean temperature response, and simple {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} calibrated against fully coupled climate models can be used to simulate the latter, at a great saving in computational cost. The spatial pattern can be estimated through the available coupled model simulations under the assumption that it does not depend on the specific scenario(s) used.

The choice of the pattern in the studies available in the literature can be as simple as the {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} average field of change (across models and/ or across scenarios, for the coupled experiments available), normalized by the corresponding change in global average temperature, choosing a segment of the simulations when the signal has emerged from the noise of natural variability from a baseline of reference (e.g., the last 20 years of the 21st century compared to pre-industrial or current climate) and taking the difference of two multi-decadal means. Similar properties and results have been obtained using more sophisticated multivariate procedures that optimize the variance explained by the pattern ({cite.12.'Holden_and_Edwards_2010}). The validity of this approximation is discussed by {cite.12.'Mitchell_et_al_1999 Mitchell et al. (1999)} and {cite.12.'Mitchell_2003 Mitchell (2003)}. {cite.12.'Huntingford_and_Cox_2000 Huntingford and Cox (2000)} evaluate the quality of the approximation for numerous variables, showing that the technique performs best for temperature, downward {Glossary.*Longwave_radiation longwave radiation}, {Glossary.*Relative_humidity relative humidity}, wind speeds and surface pressure while showing relatively larger limitations for rainfall rate anomalies. {cite.12.'Joshi_et_al_2013 Joshi et al. (2013)} have recently shown that the accuracy of the approximation, especially across models, is improved by adding a second term, linear in the land–sea surface warming ratio, another quantity that can be easily estimated from existing coupled climate model simulations. There exist of course differences between the patterns generated by different {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} (documented for example for CMIP3 in {cite.12.'Watterson_and_Whetton_2011b}), but uncertainty can be characterized, for example, by the inter-{Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} in the pattern c(x). Recent applications of the methodology to probabilistic future projections have in fact sought to fully quantify errors introduced by the approximation, on the basis of the available coupled model runs ({cite.12.'Harris_et_al_2006}).

Pattern scaling and its applications have been documented in IPCC WGI Reports before ({cite.12.'IPCC_2001}, Section 13.5.2.1; {cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}, {Chapters.10.10_3.10_3_2 Section 10.3.2}). It has been used extensively for regional temperature and precipitation change projections, for example, {cite.12.'Murphy_et_al_2007 Murphy et al. (2007)}, ({cite.12.'Watterson_2008}), {cite.12.'Giorgi_2008 Giorgi (2008)}, Harris et al. (2006, 2010), {cite.12.'May_2008a May (2008a)}, {cite.12.'Ruosteenoja_et_al_2007 Ruosteenoja et al. (2007)}, Räisänen and Ruokolainen (2006), {cite.12.'Cabre_et_al_2010 Cabre et al. (2010)} and impact studies, for example, as described in {cite.12.'Dessai_et_al_2005 Dessai et al. (2005)} and {cite.12.'Fowler_et_al_2007b Fowler et al. (2007b)}. Recent studies have focussed on patterns linked to warming at certain global average temperature change thresholds (e.g., {cite.12.'May_2008a}; {cite.12.'Sanderson_et_al_2011}) and patterns derived under the RCPs ({cite.12.'Ishizaki_et_al_2012}).

There are basic limitations to this approach, besides a degradation of its performance as the regional scale of interest becomes finer and in the presence of regionally specific forcings. Recent work with MIROC3.2 ({cite.12.'Shiogama_et_al_2010a}; {cite.12.'Shiogama_et_al_2010b}) has revealed a dependence of the precipitation sensitivity (global average precipitation change per 1°C of global warming—see {'Figure_12_6 Figure 12.6}) on the scenario, due to the precipitation being more sensitive to carbon aerosols than {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs}. In fact, there are significant differences in black and organic carbon {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing between the emission scenarios investigated by Shiogama et al. (2010a; 2010b). Levy II et al. (2013) confirm that patterns of precipitation change are spatially correlated with the sources of aerosol {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, in simulations where the indirect effect is represented. This is a behaviour that is linked to a more general limitation of pattern scaling, which breaks down if aerosol forcing is significant. The effects of aerosols have a regional nature and are thus dependent on the future sources of pollution which are likely to vary geographically in the future and are difficult to predict ({cite.12.'May_2008a}). For example, Asian and North American aerosol production are likely to have different time histories and future projections. {cite.12.'Schlesinger_et_al_2000 Schlesinger et al. (2000)} extended the methodology of pattern scaling by isolating and recombining patterns derived by dedicated experiments with a coupled climate model where sulphate aerosols were increased for various regions in turn. More recently, in an extension of pattern scaling into a probabilistic treatment of model, scenario and initial condition {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}, {cite.12.'Frieler_et_al_2012 Frieler et al. (2012)} derived joint probability distributions for regionally averaged temperature and precipitation changes as linear functions of global average temperature and additional predictors including regionally specific sulphate aerosol and {Glossary.*Black_carbon black carbon} emissions.

Pattern scaling is less accurate for strongly mitigated stabilization scenarios. This has been shown recently by {cite.12.'May_2012 May (2012)}, comparing patterns of temperature change under a scenario limiting global warming since pre-industrial times to 2°C and patterns produced by a scenario that reaches 4.5°C of global average temperature change. The limitations of pattern scaling in approximating changes while the climate system approaches equilibrium have found their explanation in {cite.12.'Manabe_and_Wetherald_1980 Manabe and Wetherald (1980)} and {cite.12.'Mitchell_et_al_1999 Mitchell et al. (1999)}. Both studies point out that as the temperatures of the deep oceans reach equilibrium (over multiple centuries) the geographical distribution of warming changes as well, for example, showing a larger warming of the high latitudes in the SH than in the earlier periods of the transient response, relative to the global mean warming. More recently, {cite.12.'Held_et_al_2010 Held et al. (2010)} showed how this slow warming pattern is in fact present during the initial transient response of the system as well, albeit with much smaller amplitude. Further, {cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2011 Gillett et al. (2011)} show how in a simulation in which emissions cease, regional temperatures and precipitation patterns exhibit ongoing changes, even though global mean temperature remains almost constant. {cite.12.'Wu_et_al_2010 Wu et al. (2010)} showed that the global precipitation response shows a nonlinear response to strong {Glossary.*Mitigation mitigation} scenarios, with the hydrological cycle continuing to intensify even after atmospheric {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} concentration, and thus global average temperature, start decreasing. Regional nonlinear responses to mitigation scenarios of precipitation and sea {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} (SSTs) are shown by {cite.12.'Chadwick_et_al_2013 Chadwick et al. (2013)}.

Other areas where pattern scaling shows a lack of robustness are the edges of polar ice caps and {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} extent, where at an earlier time in the simulation ice melts and regions of sharp gradient surface, while later in the simulation, in the absence of ice, the gradient will become less steep. Different sea ice representations in models also make the location of such regions much less robust across the model ensembles and the scenarios.

Pattern scaling has not been as thoroughly explored for quantities other than average temperature and precipitation. Impact relevant extremes, for example, seem to indicate a critical dependence on the scale at which their changes are evaluated, with studies showing that some aspects of their statistics change in a close-to-linear way with mean temperature ({cite.12.'Kharin_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Lustenberger_et_al_2013}) while others have documented the dependence of their changes on moments of their statistical distribution other than the mean ({cite.12.'Ballester_et_al_2010a}), which would make pattern scaling inadequate.
