index: hide
public: ar5-Box-13.2
name: Box 13.2
title: Box 13.2 - History of the Marine Ice-Sheet Instability Hypothesis

Marine ice sheets rest on bedrock that is submerged below {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} (often by 2 to 3 km). The most well-researched marine {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} is the West Antarctic ice sheet (WAIS) where approximately 75% of the ice sheet’s area currently rests on bedrock below sea level. The East Antarctic ice sheet (EAIS), however, also has appreciable areas grounded below sea level (~35%), in particular around the Totten and Cook Glaciers.

These ice sheets are fringed by floating ice shelves, which are fed by flow from grounded ice across a {Glossary.*Grounding_line grounding line} (GL). The GL is free to migrate both seawards and landwards as a consequence of the local balance between the weight of ice and displaced ocean water. Depending on a number of factors, which include ice-shelf extent and geometry, ice outflow to the ocean generally (but not always) increases with ice thickness at the GL. Accordingly, when the ice sheet rests on a bed that deepens towards the ice-sheet interior (see {Box_13_2 Box 13.2}, {'Box_13_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}a), the ice outflow to the ocean will generally increase as the GL retreats. It is this feature that gives rise to the Marine Ice-Sheet Instability (MISI), which states that a GL cannot remain stable on a landward-deepening slope. Even if snow {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} and outflow were initially in balance ({Box_13_2 Box 13.2}, {'Box_13_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}b), natural fluctuations in climate cause the GL to fluctuate slightly ({Box_13_2 Box 13.2}, {'Box_13_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}c). In the case of a retreat, the new GL position is then associated with deeper bedrock and thicker ice, so that outflow increases ({Box_13_2 Box 13.2}, {'Box_13_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}d). This increased outflow leads to further, self-sustaining retreat until a {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} of shallower, seaward-sloping bedrock is reached. Stable configurations can therefore exist only where the GL rests on slopes that deepen towards the ocean. A change in climate can therefore potentially force a large-scale retreat of the GL from one bedrock ridge to another further inland.

{image:'Box_13_2_Figure_1}

The MISI has a long history based on theoretical discussions that were started by {cite.13.'Weertman_1974 Weertman (1974)} and {cite.13.'Mercer_1978 Mercer (1978)}, and has seen many refinements over the subsequent years. The advent of satellite-based observations has given fresh impetus to this debate, in particular work on the GL retreat and associated thinning of Pine Island (PIG), Thwaites (TG) and Smith Glaciers (all part of the WAIS), which are collectively responsible for most of Antarctica’s present mass loss ({cite.13.'Rignot_et_al_2008}). These observations highlighted the need to develop a better understanding of the MISI to make more accurate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of the ice sheet’s future contribution to sea level rise.

Early studies of the MISI were not based on a formal derivation from the basic laws of mechanics thought to control ice-sheet flow and the robustness of their results was therefore difficult to assess. An open question was the expected impact of changes at the GL on the ice-sheet flow ({cite.13.'Hindmarsh_1993}). Recently, however, a more complete analysis from first principles has been developed that suggests that the fundamental relation between thickness and flux at the GL exists and has a power of ~5 (i.e., that a 10% increase in thickness leads to a 60% increase in flux) ({cite.13.'Schoof_2007b}, 2011). This analysis, however, does not include ice shelves that occupy laterally constrained embayments, which is often the case (for instance at PIG). In such situations, drag from ice-shelf sidewalls may suppress the positive {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} between increasing ice thickness and ice flux at the GL ({cite.13.'Dupont_and_Alley_2005}; {cite.13.'Goldberg_et_al_2009}; {cite.13.'Gudmundsson_et_al_2012}). Other factors that could suppress the instability include a sea level fall adjacent to the GL resulting from the {Glossary.*Isostatic_or_Isostasy isostatic} and gravitational effects of ice loss ({cite.13.'Gomez_et_al_2010b}).

Two processes that could trigger GL retreat are particularly relevant to contemporary polar climate change. The first is the presence of warmer ocean water under ice shelves, which leads to enhanced submarine ice-shelf melt ({cite.13.'Jacobs_et_al_2011}). The second is the presence of melt water ponds on the surface of the {Glossary.*Ice_shelf ice shelf}, which can cause stress concentrations allowing fractures to penetrate the full ice-shelf thickness. This process appears to have been a primary factor in the collapse of the Larsen B Ice Shelf (LBIS) over the course of two months in 2002 ({cite.13.'MacAyeal_et_al_2003}). The collapse of the LBIS provided a natural demonstration of the linkage between the structural integrity of an ice shelf and the flow of grounded ice draining into it. Following the breakup of LBIS, the speeds of the glaciers feeding the collapsed portion of the shelf increased twoto eightfold, while the flow of glaciers draining into a surviving sector was unaltered ({cite.13.'Rignot_et_al_2004}; {cite.13.'Scambos_et_al_2004}; {cite.13.'Rott_et_al_2011}). This indicates that a mechanical link does indeed exist between shelf and sheet, and has important implications for the future evolution of the far more significant PIG and TG systems of the WAIS.

The recent strides made in placing MISI on a sound analytical footing are, however, limited to the analysis of steady states. Numerical modelling is needed to simulate the GL retreat rates that are required to make accurate SLR projections. There are major challenges in designing models whose results are not controlled by the details of their numerical design. Problems arise at the GL because, in addition to flotation, basal traction is dramatically reduced as the ice loses contact with the underlying bedrock ({cite.13.'Pattyn_et_al_2006}). This is a topic of active research, and a combination of more complete modelling of the GL stress regime ({cite.13.'Favier_et_al_2012}) and the use of high-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} (subkilometre) models ({cite.13.'Durand_et_al_2009}; {cite.13.'Cornford_et_al_2013}) shows promise towards resolving these problems. Much progress has also been made by using model inter-comparison as a means of understanding these effects ({cite.13.'Pattyn_et_al_2013}).
