index: hide
public: ar5-Box-13.1
name: Box 13.1
title: Box 13.1 - The Global Energy Budget

The global {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} is a fundamental aspect of the Earth’s climate system. At the top of the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} (TOA), the boundary of the climate system, the balance involves {Glossary.*Shortwave_radiation shortwave radiation} received from the Sun, and shortwave radiation reflected and {Glossary.*Longwave_radiation longwave radiation} emitted by the Earth ({Chapters.1.1_2.1_2_2 Section 1.2.2}). The rate of storage of energy in the {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system} must be equal to the net downward radiative flux at the TOA.

The TOA fluxes ({Chapters.2.2_3 Section 2.3}) have been measured by the Earth Radiation Budget Experiment (ERBE) satellites from 1985 to 1999 ({cite.13.'Wong_et_al_2006}) and the Cloud and the Earth’s Radiant Energy System (CERES) satellites from March 2000 to the present ({cite.13.'Loeb_et_al_2009}). The TOA radiative flux measurements are highly precise, allowing identification of changes in the Earth’s net {Topics.*Radiation_Budgets energy budget} from year to year within the ERBE and CERES missions ({cite.13.'Kato_2009}; {cite.13.'Stackhouse_et_al_2010}; {cite.13.'Loeb_et_al_2012}), but the absolute calibration of the instruments is not sufficiently accurate to allow determination of the absolute TOA energy flux or to provide continuity across missions ({cite.13.'Loeb_et_al_2009}).

The ocean has stored more than 90% of the increase in energy in the climate system over recent decades ({Box_3_1 Box 3.1}), resulting in ocean {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion thermal expansion} and hence {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} rise (Sections {Chapters.3.3_7 3.7}, {Chapters.9.9_4 9.4} and {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_1 13.3.1}). Thus the energy and sea level budgets are linked and must be consistent ({cite.13.'Church_et_al_2011b}). This Box focusses on the Earth’s global {Glossary.*Energy_budget_of_the_Earth energy budget} since 1970 when better global observational data coverage is available. The RFs (from {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}), the global averaged {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} (Hadley Centre/Climate Research Unit gridded {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} data set 4 (HadCRUT4) ({cite.13.'Morice_et_al_2012}), and the rate of energy storage are relative to the time mean of 1860 to 1879. {cite.13.'Otto_et_al_2013 Otto et al. (2013)} used an energy imbalance over this reference period of 0.08 ± 0.03 W m–2, which is subtracted from the observed energy storage.

Since 1970, the effective {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing} ({Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF}) of the climate system has been positive as a result of increased greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations (well-mixed and short-lived {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs}, tropospheric and stratospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone}, and stratospheric water vapour) and a small increase in solar irradiance ({Box_13_1 Box 13.1}, {'Box_13_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}a). This positive ERF has been partly compensated by changes in tropospheric aerosols which predominantly reflect sunlight and modify cloud properties and structure in ways that tend to reinforce the negative ERF, although {Glossary.*Black_carbon black carbon} produces positive forcing. Explosive volcanic eruptions (such as El Chichón in Mexico in 1982 and Mt. Pinatubo in the Philippines in 1991) can inject sulphur dioxide into the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere}, giving rise to stratospheric {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol}, which persists for several years. This reflects some of the incoming {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation}, and thus gives a further negative forcing. Changes in surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} from land-use change have also led to a greater reflection of shortwave radiation back to space and hence a negative forcing. Since 1970, the net ERF of the climate system (including black carbon on snow and combined contrails and contrail-induced cirrus, not shown) has increased ({Chapters.8 Chapter 8}), resulting in a cumulative total energy inflow ({Box_13_1 Box 13.1}, {'Box_13_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}a). From 1971 to 2010, the total energy inflow (relative to the reference period 1860-1879) is estimated to be 790 [105 to 1,370] ZJ (1 ZJ = 1021 J).

{image:'Box_13_1_Figure_1}

If the ERF were fixed, the climate system would eventually warm sufficiently that the radiative response would balance the ERF, and there would be zero net heat flux into the system. As the ERF is increasing, the ocean’s large capacity to store heat means the climate system is not in equilibrium ({cite.13.'Hansen_et_al_2005}), and continues to store energy ({Box_3_1 Box 3.1} and {Box_13_1 Box 13.1}, {'Box_13_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}b). This storage provides strong evidence of a changing climate. The majority of this additional heat is in the upper 700 m of the ocean but there is also warming in the deep and abyssal ocean ({Box_3_1 Box 3.1}). The associated thermal expansion of the ocean has contributed about 40% of the observed sea level rise since 1971 (Sections {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_1 13.3.1} {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_6 13.3.6}; Church et al., (2011b)). A small amount of additional heat has been used to warm the continents, warm and melt glacial and {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}, and warm the atmosphere. The estimated increase in energy in the Earth system between 1971 and 2010 is 274 [196 to 351] ZJ ({Box_3_1 Box 3.1}).

As the climate system warms, energy is lost to space through increased outgoing radiation. This radiative response by the system is predominantly due to increased thermal grey-body radiation emitted by the atmosphere and surface, but is modified by climate feedbacks, such as changes in water vapour, surface albedo and clouds, which affect both outgoing longwave and reflected shortwave radiation. Following {cite.13.'Murphy_et_al_2009 Murphy et al. (2009)}, {Box_13_1 Box 13.1}, {'Box_13_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}b relates the cumulative total energy inflow to the Earth system to the change in energy storage and the cumulative outgoing radiation. Calculation of the latter is based on the observed globally averaged surface temperature change ΔT relative to a reference temperature for which the Earth system would be in radiative balance. This temperature change is multiplied by the climate {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} parameter α, which in turn is related to the equilibrium {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity}. For equilibrium climate sensitivities of 4.5°C, 3.0°C to 1.5°C ({Box_12_2 Box 12.2}) and an ERF for a doubled {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} concentration of 3.7 ± 0.74 W m–2 (Sections {Chapters.8.8_1 8.1} {Chapters.8.8_3 8.3}), the corresponding estimates of the {Glossary.*Climate_feedback climate feedback} parameter α are 0.82, 1.23 and 2.47 W m–2 °C–1.

In addition to these forced variations in the Earth’s energy budget, there is also {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} on decadal time scales. Observations and models indicate that because of the comparatively small heat capacity of the atmosphere, a decade of steady or even decreasing surface temperature can occur in a warming world ({cite.13.'Easterling_and_Wehner_2009}; {cite.13.'Palmer_et_al_2011}). {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model General Circulation Model} simulations indicate that these periods are associated with a transfer of heat from the upper to the deeper ocean, of order 0.1 W m–2 (Katsman and van Oldenborgh, 2011; {cite.13.'Meehl_et_al_2011}), with a near steady ({cite.13.'Meehl_et_al_2011}) or an increased radiation to space (Katsman and van Oldenborgh, 2011), again of order 0.1 W m–2. Although these natural fluctuations represent a large amount of heat, they are significantly smaller than the {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forcing of the Earth’s energy budget ({cite.13.'Huber_and_Knutti_2012}), particularly when looking at time scales of several decades or more ({cite.13.'Santer_et_al_2011}).

These independent estimates of ERF, observed heat storage, and surface warming combine to give an energy budget for the Earth that is consistent with the assessed likely range of climate sensitivity (1.5°C to 4.5°C; {Box_12_2 Box 12.2}) to within estimated {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} (high confidence). Quantification of the terms in the Earth’s energy budget and verification that these terms balance over recent decades provides strong evidence for our understanding of anthropogenic climate change. Changes in the Earth’s energy storage are a powerful observation for the {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution detection} and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution} of climate change ({Chapters.10.10_3 Section 10.3}) ({cite.13.'Gleckler_et_al_2012}; {cite.13.'Huber_and_Knutti_2012}).
