index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-13.2
name: FAQ 13.2
title: FAQ 13.2 - Will the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets Contribute to Sea Level Change over the Rest of the Century?

The Greenland, West and East Antarctic ice sheets are the largest reservoirs of freshwater on the planet. As such, they have contributed to {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} over geological and recent times. They gain mass through {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} (snowfall) and lose it by surface ablation (mostly ice melt) and outflow at their marine boundaries, either to a floating {Glossary.*Ice_shelf ice shelf}, or directly to the ocean through iceberg {Glossary.*Calving calving}. Increases in accumulation cause global {Glossary.*Mean_sea_level mean sea level} to fall, while increases in surface ablation and outflow cause it to rise. Fluctuations in these mass fluxes depend on a range of processes, both within the {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} and without, in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} and oceans. Over the course of this century, however, sources of mass loss appear set to exceed sources of mass gain, so that a continuing positive contribution to global sea level can be expected. This FAQ summarizes current research on the topic and provides indicative magnitudes for the various end-of-century (2081-2100 with respect to 1986-2005) sea level contributions from the full assessment, which are reported as the two-in-three probability level across all {Topics.*Emissions emission} {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}.

Over millennia, the slow horizontal flow of an ice sheet carries mass from areas of net accumulation (generally, in the high-elevation interior) to areas of net loss (generally, the low-elevation periphery and the coastal perimeter). At present, Greenland loses roughly half of its accumulated ice by surface ablation, and half by calving. Antarctica, on the other hand, loses virtually all its accumulation by calving and submarine melt from its fringing ice shelves. Ice shelves are floating, so their loss has only a negligible direct effect on sea level, although they can affect sea level indirectly by altering the mass budget of their parent ice sheet (see below).

In East Antarctica, some studies using satellite radar {Glossary.*Altimetry altimetry} suggest that snowfall has increased, but recent atmospheric modelling and satellite measurements of changes in gravity find no significant increase. This apparent disagreement may be because relatively small long-term trends are masked by the strong interannual variability of snowfall. Projections suggest a substantial increase in 21st century Antarctic snowfall, mainly because a warmer {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} would be able to carry more moisture into polar regions. Regional changes in atmospheric circulation probably play a secondary role. For the whole of the Antarctic ice sheet, this process is projected to contribute between 0 and 70 mm to sea level fall.

Currently, air temperatures around Antarctica are too cold for substantial surface ablation. Field and satellite-based observations, however, indicate enhanced outflow—manifested as ice-surface lowering—in a few localized coastal regions. These areas (Pine Island and Thwaites Glaciers in West Antarctica, and Totten and Cook Glaciers in East Antarctica) all lie within kilometre-deep bedrock troughs towards the edge of Antarctica’s continental shelf. The increase in outflow is thought to have been triggered by regional changes in ocean circulation, bringing warmer water in contact with floating ice shelves.

On the more northerly Antarctic Peninsula, there is a well-documented record of ice-shelf collapse, which appears to be related to the increased surface melting caused by atmospheric warming over recent decades. The subsequent thinning of glaciers draining into these ice shelves has had a positive—but minor—effect on sea level, as will any further such events on the Peninsula. Regional {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of 21st century atmospheric temperature change suggest that this process will probably not affect the stability of the large ice shelves of both the West and East Antarctica, although these ice shelves may be threatened by future oceanic change (see below).

Estimates of the contribution of the Antarctic ice sheets to sea level over the last few decades vary widely, but great strides have recently been made in reconciling the observations. There are strong indications that enhanced outflow (primarily in West Antarctica) currently outweighs any increase in snow accumulation (mainly in East Antarctica), implying a tendency towards sea level rise. Before reliable projections of outflow over the 21st century can be made with greater confidence, models that simulate ice flow need to be improved, especially of any changes in the {Glossary.*Grounding_line grounding line} that separates floating ice from that resting on bedrock and of interactions between ice shelves and the ocean. The concept of ‘marine ice-sheet instability’ is based on the idea that the outflow from an ice sheet resting on bedrock below sea level increases if ice at the grounding line is thicker and, therefore, faster flowing. On bedrock that slopes downward towards the ice-sheet interior, this creates a vicious cycle of increased outflow, causing ice at the grounding line to thin and go afloat. The grounding line then retreats down slope into thicker ice that, in turn, drives further increases in outflow. This {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} could potentially result in the rapid loss of parts of the ice sheet, as grounding lines retreat along troughs and basins that deepen towards the ice sheet’s interior.

Future climate {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} could trigger such an unstable collapse, which may then continue independently of climate. This potential collapse might unfold over centuries for individual bedrock troughs in West Antarctica and sectors of East Antarctica. Much research is focussed on understanding how important this theoretical concept is for those ice sheets. Sea level could rise if the effects of marine instability become important, but there is not enough evidence at present to unambiguously identify the precursor of such an unstable retreat. Change in outflow is projected to contribute between –20 (i.e., fall) and 185 mm to sea level rise by year 2100, although the uncertain impact of marine ice-sheet instability could increase this figure by several tenths of a metre. Overall, increased snowfall seems set to only partially offset sea level rise caused by increased outflow.

In Greenland, mass loss through more surface ablation and outflow dominates a possible recent {Glossary.*Trend trend} towards increased accumulation in the interior. Estimated mass loss due to surface ablation has doubled since the early 1990s. This trend is expected to continue over the next century as more of the ice sheet experiences surface ablation for longer periods. Indeed, projections for the 21st century suggest that increasing mass loss will dominate over weakly increasing accumulation. The refreezing of melt water within the snow pack high up on the ice sheet offers an important (though perhaps temporary) dampening effect on the relation between atmospheric warming and mass loss.

Although the observed response of outlet glaciers is both complex and highly variable, iceberg calving from many of Greenland’s major outlet glaciers has increased substantially over the last decade, and constitutes an appreciable additional mass loss. This seems to be related to the intrusion of warm water into the coastal seas around Greenland, but it is not clear whether this phenomenon is related to inter-decadal variability, such as the {Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation North Atlantic Oscillation}, or a longer term trend associated with {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas}–induced warming. Projecting its effect on 21st century outflow is therefore difficult, but it does highlight the apparent sensitivity of outflow to ocean warming. The effects of more surface melt water on the lubrication of the ice sheet’s bed, and the ability of warmer ice to deform more easily, may lead to greater rates of flow, but the link to recent increases in outflow is unclear. Change in the net difference between surface ablation and accumulation is projected to contribute between 10 and 160 mm to sea level rise in 2081-2100 (relative to 1986-2005), while increased outflow is projected to contribute a further 10 to 70 mm ({'Table_13_5 Table 13.5}).

The Greenland ice sheet has contributed to a rise in global mean sea level over the last few decades, and this trend is expected to increase during this century. Unlike Antarctica, Greenland has no known large-scale instabilities that might generate an abrupt increase in sea level rise over the 21st century. A threshold may exist, however, so that continued shrinkage might become irreversible over multi-centennial time scales, even if the climate were to return to a pre-industrial state over centennial time scales. Although mass loss through the calving of icebergs may increase in future decades, this process will eventually end when the ice margin retreats onto bedrock above sea level where the bulk of the ice sheet resides.

{image:'FAQ_13_2_Figure_1}
