index: hide
name: Levels of Organization of Living Things

Living things are highly organized and structured, following a hierarchy on a scale from small to large. The  **atom** is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules. A  **molecule** is a chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by a chemical bond. Many molecules that are biologically important are  **macromolecules**, large molecules that are typically formed by combining smaller units called monomers. An example of a macromolecule is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) ({'Figure_1_1_6 Figure 1.1.6}), which contains the instructions for the functioning of the organism that contains it.


{image:'Figure_1_1_6}
        

Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surrounded by membranes; these are called  **organelles**. Organelles are small structures that exist within cells and perform specialized functions. All living things are made of cells; the  **cell** itself is the smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living organisms. (This requirement is why viruses are not considered living: they are not made of cells. To make new viruses, they have to invade and hijack a living cell; only then can they obtain the materials they need to reproduce.) Some organisms consist of a single cell and others are multicellular. Cells are classified as prokaryotic or eukaryotic.  **Prokaryotes** are single-celled organisms that lack organelles surrounded by a membrane and do not have nuclei surrounded by nuclear membranes; in contrast, the cells of  **eukaryotes** do have membrane-bound organelles and nuclei.

In most multicellular organisms, cells combine to make  **tissues**, which are groups of similar cells carrying out the same function.  **Organs** are collections of tissues grouped together based on a common function. Organs are present not only in animals but also in plants. An  **organ system** is a higher level of organization that consists of functionally related organs. For example vertebrate animals have many organ systems, such as the circulatory system that transports blood throughout the body and to and from the lungs; it includes organs such as the heart and blood vessels.  **Organisms** are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Single-celled prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are also considered organisms and are typically referred to as microorganisms.

All the individuals of a species living within a specific area are collectively called a  **population**. For example, a forest may include many white pine trees. All of these pine trees represent the population of white pine trees in this forest. Different populations may live in the same specific area. For example, the forest with the pine trees includes populations of flowering plants and also insects and microbial populations. A  **community** is the set of populations inhabiting a particular area. For instance, all of the trees, flowers, insects, and other populations in a forest form the forest’s community. The forest itself is an ecosystem. An  **ecosystem** consists of all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, or non-living, parts of that environment such as nitrogen in the soil or rainwater. At the highest level of organization (), the  **biosphere** is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represents the zones of life on Earth. It includes land, water, and portions of the atmosphere.
