index: hide
name: Electromagnets

Early in the 19th century, it was discovered that electrical currents cause magnetic effects. The first significant observation was by the Danish scientist Hans Christian Oersted (1777–1851), who found that a compass needle was deflected by a current-carrying wire. This was the first significant evidence that the movement of charges had any connection with magnets.  **Electromagnetism** is the use of electric current to make magnets. These temporarily induced magnets are called  **electromagnets**. Electromagnets are employed for everything from a wrecking yard crane that lifts scrapped cars to controlling the beam of a 90-km-circumference particle accelerator to the magnets in medical imaging machines (See {'Figure_23_2_3a Figure 23.2.3a}).


{image:'Figure_23_2_3a}
        

{'Figure_23_2_4a1 Figure 23.2.4a1} shows that the response of iron filings to a current-carrying coil and to a permanent bar magnet. The patterns are similar. In fact, electromagnets and ferromagnets have the same basic characteristics—for example, they have north and south poles that cannot be separated and for which like poles repel and unlike poles attract.


{image:'Figure_23_2_4a1}
        

Combining a ferromagnet with an electromagnet can produce particularly strong magnetic effects. (See {'Figure_23_2_5a Figure 23.2.5a}.) Whenever strong magnetic effects are needed, such as lifting scrap metal, or in particle accelerators, electromagnets are enhanced by ferromagnetic materials. Limits to how strong the magnets can be made are imposed by coil resistance (it will overheat and melt at sufficiently high current), and so superconducting magnets may be employed. These are still limited, because superconducting properties are destroyed by too great a magnetic field.


{image:'Figure_23_2_5a}
        

{'Figure_23_2_6a Figure 23.2.6a} shows a few uses of combinations of electromagnets and ferromagnets. Ferromagnetic materials can act as memory devices, because the orientation of the magnetic fields of small domains can be reversed or erased. Magnetic information storage on videotapes and computer hard drives are among the most common applications. This property is vital in our digital world.


{image:'Figure_23_2_6a}
        
