index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.3.3.3
title: 4.3.3.3 - Regional Scale Glacier Volume and Mass Changes

In {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, global and regional scale {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} mass changes were extrapolated from in situ measurements of mass balance on individual glaciers ({cite.4.'Kaser_et_al_2006}; {cite.4.'Lemke_et_al_2007}). In some regions, such as Alaska, Patagonia and the Russian Arctic, very few if any such records were available. Since AR4, geodetically derived ice volume changes have been assimilated ({cite.4.'Cogley_2009b}), providing more consistent regional coverage and better representation of the proportion of {Glossary.*Calving calving} glaciers. In addition, the new near complete inventory (RGI) of glacier-covered areas ({cite.4.'Arendt_et_al_2012}) has improved knowledge about regional and global glacier volume and mass changes.

{'Figure_4_11 Figure 4.11} shows a compilation of available mean mass-balance rates for 1960–2010 for each of the 19 RGI regions. Where error estimates are reported, the 90% confidence bounds are shown. Most results shown are calculated using a single method, some merge multiple methods; those from {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} are reconciled estimates for 2003–2009 obtained by selecting the most reliable results of different observation methods, after {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}-by-region {Topics.*Reanalysis reanalysis} and comparison.

{image:'Figure_4_11}

Despite the great progress made since AR4, {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} inherent to specific methods, and arising from the differences between methods (cf. {Box_2_1 Box 2.1}), remain large, and confidence about the absolute value of mass loss is medium at both regional and global scales ({'Figure_4_11 Figure 4.11}). The highest density of measurement and best time {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} are available for Scandinavia (region 8) and Central Europe (region 11). The least coverage and some of the highest uncertainties are in the Arctic (regions 3, 4, 5, 9) and the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic (region 19).

{cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} discussed inconsistencies among, and differences between, methods and their respective results for 2003–2009. They found that results from the GRACE gravimetric mission agree well with results from ICESat laser {Glossary.*Altimetry altimetry} in regions of extensive ice cover (see comment on ICESat data in {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_2.4_4_2_1 Section 4.4.2.1}), but show much more variable and uncertain mass changes in regions with small or scattered ice cover such as Western Canada/USA (region 2) and the Qinghai-Xizang (Tibet) Plateau (e.g., {cite.4.'Yao_et_al_2012}, and references therein). Based on ICESat measurements, {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} also found that glaciers with in situ measurements tend to be located in sub-regions that are thinning more rapidly than the region as a whole. Thus, extrapolation from in situ measurements has a negative bias in regions with sparse measurements. Based on this analysis, {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} excluded GRACE results for regions with small or scattered glacier coverage and excluded results based on extrapolation of local records for remote, sparsely sampled regions.

The 2003–2009 regionally differentiated results are given in {'Table_4_4 Table 4.4}. There is very high confidence that, between 2003 and 2009, most mass loss was from glaciers in the Canadian Arctic (regions 3 and 4), Alaska (region 1), Greenland (region 5), the Southern Andes (region 17) and the Asian Mountains (region 13 to 15), which together account for more than 80% of the global ice loss.

{table:'Table_4_4}

Despite the considerable scatter, {'Figure_4_11 Figure 4.11} shows mass losses in all 19 regions over the past five decades that, together with their consistency with length ({Chapters.4.4_3.4_3_3.4_3_3_1 Section 4.3.3.1}) and area changes ({Chapters.4.4_3.4_3_3.4_3_3_2 Section 4.3.3.2}), provide robust evidence and very high confidence in global glacier shrinkage. In many regions, ice loss has likely increased during the last two decades, with slightly smaller losses in some regions during the most recent years, since around 2005. In Central Europe (region 11), the increase of loss rates was earliest and strongest. In the Russian Arctic (region 9) and in the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic (region 19), the signal is highly uncertain and trends are least clear. {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} present values close to balance for the Antarctic and Subantarctic (region 19) that result from complex regional patterns, for example, with losses on Antarctic Peninsula islands and gains on Ellsworth Land islands. The picture is also heterogeneous in High Mountain Asia (region 13 to 15) (e.g., {cite.4.'Bolch_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Yao_et_al_2012}), where glaciers in the Himalaya and the Hindu Kush have been losing mass (Kääb et al., 2012) while those in the Karakoram are close to balance ({cite.4.'Gardelle_et_al_2012}).

Several studies of recent glacier velocity change (Heid and Kääb, 2012; {cite.4.'Azam_et_al_2012}) and of the worldwide present-day sizes of {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} areas ({cite.4.'Bahr_et_al_2009}) indicate that the world’s glaciers are out of balance with the present climate and thus committed to losing considerable mass in the future, even without further changes in climate. Increasing ice temperatures recorded at high elevation sites in the tropical Andes ({cite.4.'Gilbert_et_al_2010}) and in the European Alps (Col {Glossary.*Dobson_Unit du} Dome on Mont Blanc and Monte Rosa) ({cite.4.'Vincent_et_al_2007}; {cite.4.'Hoelzle_et_al_2011}), as well as the ongoing thinning of the cold {Glossary.*Surface_layer surface layer} on Storglaciären in northern Sweden ({cite.4.'Gusmeroli_et_al_2012}), support this conclusion and give it high confidence.
