index: hide
name: Colors of Transition Metal Complexes

When atoms or molecules absorb light at the proper frequency, their electrons are excited to higher-energy orbitals. For many main group atoms and molecules, the absorbed photons are in the ultraviolet range of the electromagnetic spectrum, which cannot be detected by the human eye. For coordination compounds, the energy difference between the  *d* orbitals often allows photons in the visible range to be absorbed.

The human eye perceives a mixture of all the colors, in the proportions present in sunlight, as white light. Complementary colors, those located across from each other on a color wheel, are also used in color vision. The eye perceives a mixture of two complementary colors, in the proper proportions, as white light. Likewise, when a color is missing from white light, the eye sees its complement. For example, when red photons are absorbed from white light, the eyes see the color green. When violet photons are removed from white light, the eyes see lemon yellow. The blue color of the [Cu(NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>4</sub>]<sup>2+</sup> ion results because this ion absorbs orange and red light, leaving the complementary colors of blue and green ({'Figure_19_3_Lightper Figure 19.3.Lightper}).


{image:'Figure_19_3_Lightper}
        

Small changes in the relative energies of the orbitals that electrons are transitioning between can lead to drastic shifts in the color of light absorbed. Therefore, the colors of coordination compounds depend on many factors. As shown in {'Figure_19_3_ColorAq Figure 19.3.ColorAq}, different aqueous metal ions can have different colors. In addition, different oxidation states of one metal can produce different colors, as shown for the vanadium complexes in the link below.


{image:'Figure_19_3_ColorAq}
        

The specific ligands coordinated to the metal center also influence the color of coordination complexes. For example, the iron(II) complex [Fe(H<sub>2</sub>O)<sub>6</sub>]SO<sub>4</sub> appears blue-green because the high-spin complex absorbs photons in the red wavelengths ({'Figure_19_3_Feabs Figure 19.3.Feabs}). In contrast, the low-spin iron(II) complex K<sub>4</sub>[Fe(CN)<sub>6</sub>] appears pale yellow because it absorbs higher-energy violet photons.


{image:'Figure_19_3_Feabs}
        

In general, strong-field ligands cause a large split in the energies of  *d* orbitals of the central metal atom (large Δ<sub>oct</sub>). Transition metal coordination compounds with these ligands are yellow, orange, or red because they absorb higher-energy violet or blue light. On the other hand, coordination compounds of transition metals with weak-field ligands are often blue-green, blue, or indigo because they absorb lower-energy yellow, orange, or red light.

A coordination compound of the Cu<sup>+</sup> ion has a  *d*<sup>10</sup> configuration, and all the  *eg* orbitals are filled. To excite an electron to a higher level, such as the 4 *p* orbital, photons of very high energy are necessary. This energy corresponds to very short wavelengths in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum. No visible light is absorbed, so the eye sees no change, and the compound appears white or colorless. A solution containing [Cu(CN)<sub>2</sub>]<sup>−</sup>, for example, is colorless. On the other hand, octahedral Cu<sup>2+</sup> complexes have a vacancy in the  *eg* orbitals, and electrons can be excited to this level. The wavelength (energy) of the light absorbed corresponds to the visible part of the spectrum, and Cu<sup>2+</sup> complexes are almost always colored—blue, blue-green violet, or yellow ({'Figure_19_3_Cu Figure 19.3.Cu}). Although CFT successfully describes many properties of coordination complexes, molecular orbital explanations (beyond the introductory scope provided here) are required to understand fully the behavior of coordination complexes.


{image:'Figure_19_3_Cu}
        
