index: hide
name: Oral Infections

As noted earlier, normal oral microbiota can cause dental and periodontal infections. However, there are number of other infections that can manifest in the oral cavity when other microbes are present.

## Herpetic Gingivostomatitis

As described in <link:>, infections by  **herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)** frequently manifest as  **oral herpes**, also called  **acute herpes labialis** and characterized by  **cold sores** on the lips, mouth, or gums. HSV-1 can also cause acute  **herpetic gingivostomatitis**, a condition that results in ulcers of the mucous membranes inside the mouth ({'Figure_24_2_HerpGing Figure 24.2.HerpGing}). Herpetic gingivostomatitis is normally self-limiting except in immunocompromised patients. Like oral herpes, the infection is generally diagnosed through clinical examination, but cultures or biopsies may be obtained if other signs or symptoms suggest the possibility of a different causative agent. If treatment is needed, mouthwashes or antiviral medications such as  **acyclovir**,  **famciclovir**, or  **valacyclovir** may be used.


{image:'Figure_24_2_HerpGing}
        

## Oral Thrush

The yeast  **Candida** is part of the normal human microbiota, but overgrowths, especially of  *Candida albicans*, can lead to infections in several parts of the body. When  *Candida* infection develops in the oral cavity, it is called  **oral thrush**. Oral thrush is most common in infants because they do not yet have well developed immune systems and have not acquired the robust normal microbiota that keeps  *Candida* in check in adults. Oral thrush is also common in immunodeficient patients and is a common infection in patients with AIDS.

Oral thrush is characterized by the appearance of white patches and pseudomembranes in the mouth ({'Figure_24_2_Thrush Figure 24.2.Thrush}) and can be associated with bleeding. The infection may be treated topically with  **nystatin** or  **clotrimazole** oral suspensions, although systemic treatment is sometimes needed. In serious cases, systemic azoles such as  **fluconazole** or  **itraconazole** (for strains resistant to fluconazole), may be used. Amphotericin B can also be used if the infection is severe or if the  *Candida* species is azole-resistant.


{image:'Figure_24_2_Thrush}
        

## Mumps

The viral disease  **mumps** is an infection of the parotid glands, the largest of the three pairs of  **salivary glands** ({'Figure_24_1_OralCavity Figure 24.1.OralCavity}). The causative agent is mumps virus (MuV), a  **paramyxovirus** with an envelope that has hemagglutinin and neuraminidase spikes. A fusion protein located on the surface of the envelope helps to fuse the viral envelope to the host cell plasma membrane.

Mumps virus is transmitted through respiratory droplets or through contact with contaminated saliva, making it quite contagious so that it can lead easily to epidemics. It causes fever, muscle pain, headache, pain with chewing, loss of appetite, fatigue, and weakness. There is swelling of the salivary glands and associated pain ({'Figure_24_2_Mumps Figure 24.2.Mumps}). The virus can enter the bloodstream ( **viremia**), allowing it to spread to the organs and the central nervous system. The infection ranges from subclinical cases to cases with serious complications, such as  **encephalitis**,  **meningitis**, and deafness. Inflammation of the pancreas, testes, ovaries, and breasts may also occur and cause permanent damage to those organs; despite these complications, a mumps infection rarely cause sterility.

Mumps can be recognized based on clinical signs and symptoms, and a diagnosis can be confirmed with laboratory testing. The virus can be identified using culture or molecular techniques such as RT-PCR. Serologic tests are also available, especially enzyme immunoassays that detect antibodies. There is no specific treatment for mumps, so supportive therapies are used. The most effective way to avoid infection is through vaccination. Although mumps used to be a common childhood disease, it is now rare in the United States due to vaccination with the measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) vaccine.


{image:'Figure_24_2_Mumps}
        
