index: hide
name: Periodontal Disease

In addition to damage to the  **teeth** themselves, the surrounding structures can be affected by microbes. Periodontal disease is the result of infections that lead to inflammation and tissue damage in the structures surrounding the teeth. The progression from mild to severe  **periodontal disease** is generally reversible and preventable with good oral hygiene.

Inflammation of the gums that can lead to irritation and bleeding is called  **gingivitis**. When  **plaque** accumulates on the teeth, bacteria colonize the  **gingival space**. As this space becomes increasingly blocked, the environment becomes anaerobic. This allows a wide variety of microbes to colonize, including  **Porphyromonas**,  **Streptococcus**, and  **Actinomyces**. The bacterial products, which include  **lipopolysaccharide** (LPS),  **proteases**,  **lipoteichoic acids**, and others, cause inflammation and gum damage ({'Figure_24_2_Gingivitis Figure 24.2.Gingivitis}). It is possible that methanogenic archaeans (including  *Methanobrevibacter oralis* and other  **Methanobrevibacter** species) also contribute to disease progression as some species have been identified in patients with  **periodontal disease**, but this has proven difficult to study. Gingivitis is diagnosed by visual inspection, including measuring pockets in the gums, and X-rays, and is usually treated using good dental hygiene and professional dental cleaning, with antibiotics reserved for severe cases.


{image:'Figure_24_2_Gingivitis}
        

Over time, chronic gingivitis can develop into the more serious condition of  **periodontitis** ({'Figure_24_2_Peridont Figure 24.2.Peridont}). When this happens, the gums recede and expose parts of the tooth below the  **crown**. This newly exposed area is relatively unprotected, so bacteria can grow on it and spread underneath the  **enamel** of the crown and cause  **cavities**. Bacteria in the  **gingival space** can also erode the  **cementum**, which helps to hold the  **teeth** in place. If not treated, erosion of cementum can lead to the movement or loss of teeth. The bones of the jaw can even erode if the infection spreads. This condition can be associated with bleeding and halitosis (bad breath). Cleaning and appropriate dental hygiene may be sufficient to treat periodontitis. However, in cases of severe periodontitis, an antibiotic may be given. Antibiotics may be given in pill form or applied directly to the gum (local treatment). Antibiotics given can include  **tetracycline**,  **doxycycline**,  **macrolides** or  **β-lactams**. Because periodontitis can be caused by a mix of microbes, a combination of antibiotics may be given.


{image:'Figure_24_2_Peridont}
        

## Trench Mouth

When certain bacteria, such as  *Prevotella intermedia*,  *Fusobacterium* species, and  *Treponema vicentii*, are involved and periodontal disease progresses,  **acute necrotizing ulcerative gingivitis** or  **trench mouth**, also called Vincent's disease, can develop. This is severe periodontitis characterized by erosion of the gums, ulcers, substantial pain with chewing, and halitosis ({'Figure_24_2_Trench Figure 24.2.Trench}) that can be diagnosed by visual examination and X-rays. In countries with good medical and dental care, it is most common in individuals with weakened immune systems, such as patients with AIDS. In addition to cleaning and pain medication, patients may be prescribed antibiotics such as  **amoxicillin**,  **amoxicillin clavulanate**,  **clindamycin**, or  **doxycycline**.


{image:'Figure_24_2_Trench}
        
