index: hide
name: Dental Caries

Cavities of the teeth, known clinically as  **dental caries**, are microbial lesions that cause damage to the teeth. Over time, the lesion can grow through the outer  **enamel** layer to infect the underlying  **dentin** or even the innermost  **pulp**. If dental caries are not treated, the infection can become an  **abscess** that spreads to the deeper tissues of the  **teeth**, near the roots, or to the bloodstream.

Tooth decay results from the metabolic activity of microbes that live on the teeth. A layer of proteins and carbohydrates forms when clean teeth come into contact with saliva. Microbes are attracted to this food source and form a  **biofilm** called  **plaque**. The most important cariogenic species in these biofilms is  **Streptococcus mutans**. When  **sucrose**, a disaccharide sugar from food, is broken down by bacteria in the mouth,  **glucose** and  **fructose** are produced. The glucose is used to make  **dextran**, which is part of the extracellular matrix of the biofilm. Fructose is fermented, producing organic acids such as  **lactic acid**. These acids dissolve the minerals of the tooth, including  **enamel**, even though it is the hardest material in the body. The acids work even more quickly on exposed  **dentin** ({'Figure_24_2_ToothDecay Figure 24.2.ToothDecay}). Over time, the  **plaque** **biofilm** can become thick and eventually calcify. When a heavy plaque deposit becomes hardened in this way, it is called  **tartar** or  **dental calculus** ({'Figure_24_2_Xray Figure 24.2.Xray}). These substantial plaque biofilms can include a variety of bacterial species, including  **Streptococcus** and  **Actinomyces** species.


{image:'Figure_24_2_ToothDecay}
        


{image:'Figure_24_2_Xray}
        

Some tooth decay is visible from the outside, but it is not always possible to see all decay or the extent of the decay. X-ray imaging is used to produce radiographs that can be studied to look for deeper decay and damage to the root or bone ({'Figure_24_2_Xray Figure 24.2.Xray}). If not detected, the decay can reach the pulp or even spread to the bloodstream. Painful abscesses can develop.

To prevent tooth decay, prophylactic treatment and good hygiene are important. Regular tooth brushing and flossing physically removes microbes and combats microbial growth and  **biofilm** formation. Toothpaste contains  **fluoride**, which becomes incorporated into the hydroxyapatite of tooth  **enamel**, protecting it against acidity caused by fermentation of mouth microbiota. Fluoride is also bacteriostatic, thus slowing enamel degradation. Antiseptic mouthwashes commonly contain plant-derived  **phenolics** like  **thymol** and  **eucalyptol** and/or heavy metals like  **zinc chloride** (see <link:>). Phenolics tend to be stable and persistent on surfaces, and they act through denaturing proteins and disrupting membranes.

Regular dental cleanings allow for the detection of decay at early stages and the removal of  **tartar**. They may also help to draw attention to other concerns, such as damage to the enamel from acidic drinks. Reducing sugar consumption may help prevent damage that results from the microbial fermentation of sugars. Additionally, sugarless candies or gum with sugar alcohols (such as  **xylitol**) can reduce the production of acids because these are fermented to nonacidic compounds (although excess consumption may lead to gastrointestinal distress). Fluoride treatment or ingesting fluoridated water strengthens the minerals in teeth and reduces the incidence of  **dental caries**.

If  **caries** develop, prompt treatment prevents worsening. Smaller areas of decay can be drilled to remove affected tissue and then filled. If the  **pulp** is affected, then a  **root canal** may be needed to completely remove the infected tissues to avoid continued spread of the infection, which could lead to painful  **abscesses**.
