index: hide
name: Section Summary

  * Cosmology is the study of the character and evolution of the universe.
  * The two most important features of the universe are the cosmological red shifts of its galaxies being proportional to distance and its cosmic microwave background (CMBR). Both support the notion that there was a gigantic explosion, known as the Big Bang that created the universe. 
  * Galaxies farther away than our local group have, on an average, a recessional velocity given by          <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mrow><mrow><mi>v</mi><mo stretchy="false">=</mo><msub><mi>H</mi><mo>0</mo><mrow/></msub></mrow><mi>d</mi></mrow></mrow><mtext>,</mtext><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;v=H rSub &#123; size 8&#123;c&#125; &#125; d&#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>where d size 12&#123;d&#125; &#123;&#125; is the distance to the galaxy and H0 size 12&#123;H rSub &#123; size 8&#123;c&#125; &#125; &#125; &#123;&#125; is the Hubble constant, taken to have the average value H0=20km/s⋅Mly. size 12&#123;H rSub &#123; size 8&#123;c&#125; &#125; ="20"`"km/s" cdot "Mly" "." &#125; &#123;&#125;
  * Explanations of the large-scale characteristics of the universe are intimately tied to particle physics. 
  * The dominance of matter over antimatter and the smoothness of the CMBR are two characteristics that are tied to particle physics.
  * The epochs of the universe are known back to very shortly after the Big Bang, based on known laws of physics.
  * The earliest epochs are tied to the unification of forces, with the electroweak epoch being partially understood, the GUT epoch being speculative, and the TOE epoch being highly speculative since it involves an unknown single superforce. 
  * The transition from GUT to electroweak is called spontaneous symmetry breaking. It released energy that caused the inflationary scenario, which in turn explains the smoothness of the CMBR. 
