index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 14.8.12
title: 14.8.12 - Southeast Asia

Southeast Asia features a complex range of terrains and land–sea contrasts. Across the {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, temperature has been increasing at a rate of 0.14°C to 0.20°C per decade since the 1960s ({cite.14.'Tangang_et_al_2007}), coupled with a rising number of hot days and warm nights, and a decline in cooler weather ({cite.14.'Manton_et_al_2001}; {cite.14.'Caesar_et_al_2011}). A positive {Glossary.*Trend trend} in the occurrence of heavy (top 10% by rain amount) and light (bottom 5%) rain events and a negative trend in moderate (25 to 75%) rain events has been observed ({cite.14.'Lau_and_Wu_2007}). Annual total wet-day rainfall has increased by 22 mm per decade, while rainfall from extreme rain days has increased by 10 mm per decade ({cite.14.'Alexander_et_al_2006}; {cite.14.'Caesar_et_al_2011}).

Several large-scale phenomena influence the climate of this region. While {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} ({Chapters.14.14_4 Section 14.4}) influence is predominant in East Malaysia and areas east of it, Maritime continent {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon} ({Chapters.14.14_2.14_2_3 Section 14.2.3}) influences the climate in Peninsular Malaya. The impact of the {Glossary.*Indian_Ocean_Dipole IOD} ({Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_3 Section 14.3.3}) is more prominent in eastern Indonesia. Thus {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} and trends differ vastly across the region and between seasons. Between 1955 and 2005 the ratio of rainfall in the wet to the dry seasons increased ({cite.14.'Aldrian_and_Djamil_2008}). This appears to be at least in part consistent with an upward trend of the IOD. While an increasing frequency of {Topics.*Extreme_Events extreme events} has been reported in the northern parts of South East Asia, decreasing trends in such events are reported in Myanmar ({cite.14.'Chang_2011}); see also {'Figure_14_25 Figure 14.25}.

For a given region, strong seasonality in change is observed. In Peninsular Malaya during the southwest monsoon season, total rainfall and the frequency of wet days decreased, but rainfall intensity increased in much of the region ({cite.14.'Deni_et_al_2010}). During the northeast monsoon, total rainfall, the frequency of extreme rainfall events, and rainfall intensity all increased over the peninsula ({cite.14.'Suhaila_et_al_2010}).

High-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} model simulations are necessary to resolve complex terrain such as in Southeast Asia ({cite.14.'Nguyen_et_al_2012}; {Chapters.14.14_2.14_2_2.14_2_2_4 Section 14.2.2.4}). In a {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model RCM} {Glossary.*Downscaling downscaling} simulation using the A1B {Topics.*Emissions emission} scenario ({cite.14.'Chotamonsak_et_al_2011}), regional average rainfall was {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} to increase, consistent with a combination of the ‘warmer getting wetter’ mechanism ({Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_1 Section 14.3.1}), an increase in summer monsoon, though there is a lack of consensus on future ENSO changes. The spatial pattern of change is similar to that projected in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({cite.14.'Christensen_et_al_2007}, Section 11.4).

The median increase in temperature over land ranges from 0.8°C in {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} to 3.2°C in {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} by the end of this century (2081–2100). A moderate increase in precipitation is projected for the region: 1% in RCP2.6 increasing to 8% in RCP8.5 by 2100 ({'Table_14_1 Table 14.1}, Supplementary Material Table 14.SM.1a to 14.SM.1c, {'Figure_14_27 Figures 14.27} and AI.64 to AI.65). On islands neighbouring the southeast tropical Indian Ocean, rainfall is projected to decrease during July to November (the IOD prevalent season), consistent with a slower oceanic warming in the east than in the west tropical Indian Ocean, despite little change projected in the IOD ({Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_3 Section 14.3.3}).

In summary, warming is very likely to continue with substantial sub-regional variations. There is medium confidence in a moderate increase in rainfall, except on Indonesian islands neighbouring the southeast Indian Ocean. Strong regional variations are expected because of terrain.
