index: hide
name: Molecular Koch’s Postulates

In 1988, Stanley  **Falkow** (1934–) proposed a revised form of Koch’s postulates known as  **molecular Koch’s postulates**. These are listed in the left column of . The premise for molecular Koch’s postulates is not in the ability to isolate a particular pathogen but rather to identify a gene that may cause the organism to be pathogenic.

Falkow’s modifications to Koch’s original postulates explain not only infections caused by intracellular pathogens but also the existence of pathogenic strains of organisms that are usually nonpathogenic. For example, the predominant form of the bacterium  **Escherichia coli** is a member of the normal microbiota of the human intestine and is generally considered harmless. However, there are pathogenic strains of  *E. coli* such as enterotoxigenic  *E. coli* ( **ETEC**) and  **enterohemorrhagic E. coli (O157:H7)** (EHEC). We now know ETEC and  **EHEC** exist because of the acquisition of new genes by the once-harmless  *E. coli*, which, in the form of these pathogenic strains, is now capable of producing toxins and causing illness. The pathogenic forms resulted from minor genetic changes. The right-side column of  illustrates how molecular Koch’s postulates can be applied to identify EHEC as a pathogenic bacterium.


****

| Molecular Koch’s Postulates | Application to EHEC |
|:-:|:-:|
| (1) The phenotype (sign or symptom of disease) should be associated only with pathogenic strains of a species. | EHEC causes intestinal inflammation and diarrhea, whereas nonpathogenic strains of  *E. coli* do not. |
| (2) Inactivation of the suspected gene(s) associated with pathogenicity should result in a measurable loss of pathogenicity. | One of the genes in EHEC encodes for Shiga toxin, a bacterial toxin (poison) that inhibits protein synthesis. Inactivating this gene reduces the bacteria’s ability to cause disease. |
| (3) Reversion of the inactive gene should restore the disease phenotype. | By adding the gene that encodes the toxin back into the genome (e.g., with a phage or plasmid), EHEC’s ability to cause disease is restored. |
    

As with Koch’s original postulates, the molecular Koch’s postulates have limitations. For example, genetic manipulation of some pathogens is not possible using current methods of molecular genetics. In a similar vein, some diseases do not have suitable animal models, which limits the utility of both the original and molecular postulates.
