index: hide
name: Stages of Pathogenesis

To cause disease, a pathogen must successfully achieve four steps or  **stages of pathogenesis**: exposure (contact), adhesion (colonization), invasion, and infection. The pathogen must be able to gain entry to the host, travel to the location where it can establish an infection, evade or overcome the host’s immune response, and cause damage (i.e., disease) to the host. In many cases, the cycle is completed when the pathogen exits the host and is transmitted to a new host.

## Exposure

An encounter with a potential pathogen is known as  **exposure** or  **contact**. The food we eat and the objects we handle are all ways that we can come into contact with potential pathogens. Yet, not all contacts result in infection and disease. For a pathogen to cause disease, it needs to be able to gain access into host tissue. An anatomic site through which pathogens can pass into host tissue is called a  **portal of entry**. These are locations where the host cells are in direct contact with the external environment. Major portals of entry are identified in {'Figure_15_2_Portal Figure 15.2.Portal} and include the skin, mucous membranes, and parenteral routes.


{image:'Figure_15_2_Portal}
        

Mucosal surfaces are the most important portals of entry for microbes; these include the mucous membranes of the respiratory tract, the gastrointestinal tract, and the genitourinary tract. Although most mucosal surfaces are in the interior of the body, some are contiguous with the external skin at various body openings, including the eyes, nose, mouth, urethra, and anus.

Most pathogens are suited to a particular portal of entry. A pathogen’s  **portal specificity** is determined by the organism’s environmental adaptions and by the enzymes and toxins they secrete. The respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts are particularly vulnerable portals of entry because particles that include microorganisms are constantly inhaled or ingested, respectively.

Pathogens can also enter through a breach in the protective barriers of the skin and mucous membranes. Pathogens that enter the body in this way are said to enter by the  **parenteral route**. For example, the skin is a good natural barrier to pathogens, but breaks in the skin (e.g., wounds, insect bites, animal bites, needle pricks) can provide a parenteral portal of entry for microorganisms.

In pregnant women, the  **placenta** normally prevents microorganisms from passing from the mother to the fetus. However, a few pathogens are capable of crossing the blood-placental barrier. The gram-positive bacterium  **Listeria monocytogenes**, which causes the foodborne disease listeriosis, is one example that poses a serious risk to the fetus and can sometimes lead to spontaneous abortion. Other pathogens that can pass the placental barrier to infect the fetus are known collectively by the acronym  **TORCH** ().

Transmission of infectious diseases from mother to baby is also a concern at the time of birth when the baby passes through the birth canal. Babies whose mothers have active  **chlamydia** or  **gonorrhea** infections may be exposed to the causative pathogens in the vagina, which can result in eye infections that lead to blindness. To prevent this, it is standard practice to administer antibiotic drops to infants’ eyes shortly after birth.


****

|   | Disease | Pathogen |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **T** | Toxoplasmosis |  *Toxoplasma gondii* (protozoan) |
|  **O** | Syphilis<br />Chickenpox<br />Hepatitis B<br />HIV<br />Fifth disease (erythema infectiosum) |  *Treponema pallidum* (bacterium)<br />Varicella-zoster virus (human herpesvirus 3)<br />Hepatitis B virus (hepadnavirus)<br />Retrovirus<br />Parvovirus B19 |
|  **R** | Rubella (German measles) | Togavirus |
|  **C** | Cytomegalovirus | Human herpesvirus 5 |
|  **H** | Herpes | Herpes simplex viruses (HSV) 1 and 2 |
    

## Adhesion

Following the initial exposure, the pathogen adheres at the portal of entry. The term  **adhesion** refers to the capability of pathogenic microbes to attach to the cells of the body using  **adhesion factors**, and different pathogens use various mechanisms to adhere to the cells of host tissues.

Molecules (either proteins or carbohydrates) called  **adhesins** are found on the surface of certain pathogens and bind to specific receptors (glycoproteins) on host cells. Adhesins are present on the fimbriae and flagella of bacteria, the cilia of protozoa, and the capsids or membranes of viruses. Protozoans can also use hooks and barbs for adhesion; spike proteins on viruses also enhance viral adhesion. The production of  **glycocalyces** (slime layers and capsules) ({'Figure_15_2_adhesion Figure 15.2.adhesion}), with their high sugar and protein content, can also allow certain bacterial pathogens to attach to cells.

Biofilm growth can also act as an adhesion factor. A  **biofilm** is a community of bacteria that produce a glycocalyx, known as  **extrapolymeric substance (EPS)**, that allows the biofilm to attach to a surface. Persistent  **Pseudomonas aeruginosa** infections are common in patients suffering from cystic fibrosis, burn wounds, and middle-ear infections (otitis media) because  *P. aeruginosa* produces a biofilm. The EPS allows the bacteria to adhere to the host cells and makes it harder for the host to physically remove the pathogen. The EPS not only allows for attachment but provides protection against the immune system and antibiotic treatments, preventing antibiotics from reaching the bacterial cells within the biofilm. In addition, not all bacteria in a biofilm are rapidly growing; some are in stationary phase. Since antibiotics are most effective against rapidly growing bacteria, portions of bacteria in a biofilm are protected against antibiotics.


{image:'Figure_15_2_adhesion}
        

## Invasion

Once adhesion is successful,  **invasion** can proceed. Invasion involves the dissemination of a pathogen throughout local tissues or the body. Pathogens may produce exoenzymes or toxins, which serve as  **virulence factors** that allow them to colonize and damage host tissues as they spread deeper into the body. Pathogens may also produce virulence factors that protect them against immune system defenses. A pathogen’s specific virulence factors determine the degree of tissue damage that occurs. {'Figure_15_2_Invasion Figure 15.2.Invasion} shows the invasion of  *H. pylori* into the tissues of the stomach, causing damage as it progresses.


{image:'Figure_15_2_Invasion}
        

Intracellular pathogens achieve invasion by entering the host’s cells and reproducing. Some are  **obligate intracellular pathogens** (meaning they can only reproduce inside of host cells) and others are  **facultative intracellular pathogens** (meaning they can reproduce either inside or outside of host cells). By entering the host cells, intracellular pathogens are able to evade some mechanisms of the immune system while also exploiting the nutrients in the host cell.

Entry to a cell can occur by  **endocytosis**. For most kinds of host cells, pathogens use one of two different mechanisms for endocytosis and entry. One mechanism relies on effector proteins secreted by the pathogen; these effector proteins trigger entry into the host cell. This is the method that  **Salmonella** and  **Shigella** use when invading intestinal epithelial cells. When these pathogens come in contact with epithelial cells in the intestine, they secrete effector molecules that cause protrusions of membrane ruffles that bring the bacterial cell in. This process is called  **membrane ruffling**. The second mechanism relies on surface proteins expressed on the pathogen that bind to receptors on the host cell, resulting in entry. For example,  **Yersinia** *pseudotuberculosis* produces a surface protein known as  **invasin** that binds to beta-1 integrins expressed on the surface of host cells.

Some host cells, such as white blood cells and other phagocytes of the immune system, actively endocytose pathogens in a process called phagocytosis. Although phagocytosis allows the pathogen to gain entry to the host cell, in most cases, the host cell kills and degrades the pathogen by using digestive enzymes. Normally, when a pathogen is ingested by a phagocyte, it is enclosed within a phagosome in the cytoplasm; the phagosome fuses with a lysosome to form a phagolysosome, where digestive enzymes kill the pathogen (see <link:>). However, some intracellular pathogens have the ability to survive and multiply within phagocytes. Examples include  **Listeria monocytogenes** and  **Shigella**; these bacteria produce proteins that lyse the phagosome before it fuses with the lysosome, allowing the bacteria to escape into the phagocyte’s cytoplasm where they can multiply. Bacteria such as  **Mycobacterium tuberculosis**,  **Legionella pneumophila**, and  **Salmonella** species use a slightly different mechanism to evade being digested by the phagocyte. These bacteria prevent the fusion of the phagosome with the lysosome, thus remaining alive and dividing within the phagosome.

## Infection

Following invasion, successful multiplication of the pathogen leads to infection. Infections can be described as local, focal, or systemic, depending on the extent of the infection. A  **local infection** is confined to a small area of the body, typically near the portal of entry. For example, a hair follicle infected by  **Staphylococcus aureus** infection may result in a boil around the site of infection, but the bacterium is largely contained to this small location. Other examples of local infections that involve more extensive tissue involvement include urinary tract infections confined to the bladder or pneumonia confined to the lungs.

In a  **focal infection**, a localized pathogen, or the toxins it produces, can spread to a secondary location. For example, a dental hygienist nicking the gum with a sharp tool can lead to a local infection in the gum by  *Streptococcus* bacteria of the normal oral microbiota. These  *Streptococcus* spp. may then gain access to the bloodstream and make their way to other locations in the body, resulting in a secondary infection.

When an infection becomes disseminated throughout the body, we call it a  **systemic infection**. For example, infection by the  **varicella-zoster virus** typically gains entry through a mucous membrane of the upper respiratory system. It then spreads throughout the body, resulting in the classic red skin lesions associated with  **chickenpox**. Since these lesions are not sites of initial infection, they are signs of a systemic infection.

Sometimes a  **primary infection**, the initial infection caused by one pathogen, can lead to a  **secondary infection** by another pathogen. For example, the immune system of a patient with a primary infection by  **HIV** becomes compromised, making the patient more susceptible to secondary diseases like oral thrush and others caused by opportunistic pathogens. Similarly, a primary infection by  **Influenzavirus** damages and decreases the defense mechanisms of the lungs, making patients more susceptible to a secondary pneumonia by a bacterial pathogen like  **Haemophilus influenzae** or  **Streptococcus pneumoniae**. Some secondary infections can even develop as a result of treatment for a primary infection. Antibiotic therapy targeting the primary pathogen can cause collateral damage to the normal microbiota, creating an opening for opportunistic pathogens (see ).
