index: hide
name: Enzyme-linked Immunosorbent Assays (ELISAs)

The  **enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs)** are widely used EIAs. In the  **direct ELISA**, antigens are immobilized in the well of a microtiter plate. An antibody that is specific for a particular antigen and is conjugated to an enzyme is added to each well. If the antigen is present, then the antibody will bind. After washing to remove any unbound antibodies, a colorless substrate ( **chromogen**) is added. The presence of the enzyme converts the substrate into a colored end product ({'Figure_20_4_EIA Figure 20.4.EIA}). While this technique is faster because it only requires the use of one antibody, it has the disadvantage that the signal from a direct ELISA is lower (lower sensitivity).

In a  **sandwich ELISA**, the goal is to use antibodies to precisely quantify specific antigen present in a solution, such as antigen from a pathogen, a serum protein, or a hormone from the blood or urine to list just a few examples. The first step of a sandwich ELISA is to add the  **primary antibody** to all the wells of a microtiter plate ({'Figure_20_4_ELISA Figure 20.4.ELISA}). The antibody sticks to the plastic by hydrophobic interactions. After an appropriate incubation time, any unbound antibody is washed away. Comparable washes are used between each of the subsequent steps to ensure that only specifically bound molecules remain attached to the plate. A blocking protein is then added (e.g., albumin or the milk protein casein) to bind the remaining nonspecific protein-binding sites in the well. Some of the wells will receive known amounts of antigen to allow the construction of a standard curve, and unknown antigen solutions are added to the other wells. The primary antibody captures the antigen and, following a wash, the  **secondary antibody** is added, which is a  **polyclonal antibody** that is conjugated to an enzyme. After a final wash, a colorless substrate (chromogen) is added, and the enzyme converts it into a colored end product. The color intensity of the sample caused by the end product is measured with a  **spectrophotometer**. The amount of color produced (measured as absorbance) is directly proportional to the amount of enzyme, which in turn is directly proportional to the captured antigen. ELISAs are extremely sensitive, allowing antigen to be quantified in the nanogram (10<sup>–9</sup> g) per mL range.

In an  **indirect ELISA**, we quantify antigen-specific antibody rather than antigen. We can use indirect ELISA to detect antibodies against many types of pathogens, including  **Borrelia burgdorferi** ( **Lyme disease**) and  **HIV**. There are three important differences between indirect and direct ELISAs as shown in {'Figure_20_4_Indirect Figure 20.4.Indirect}. Rather than using antibody to capture antigen, the indirect ELISA starts with attaching known antigen (e.g., peptides from HIV) to the bottom of the microtiter plate wells. After blocking the unbound sites on the plate, patient serum is added; if antibodies are present ( **primary antibody**), they will bind the antigen. After washing away any unbound proteins, the secondary antibody with its conjugated enzyme is directed against the primary antibody (e.g., antihuman immunoglobulin). The  **secondary antibody** allows us to quantify how much antigen-specific antibody is present in the patient’s serum by the intensity of the color produced from the conjugated enzyme-chromogen reaction.

As with several other tests for antibodies discussed in this chapter, there is always concern about  **cross-reactivity** with antibodies directed against some other antigen, which can lead to false-positive results. Thus, we cannot definitively diagnose an HIV infection (or any other type of infection) based on a single indirect ELISA assay. We must confirm any suspected positive test, which is most often done using either an  **immunoblot**that actually identifies the presence of specific peptides from the pathogen or a test to identify the nucleic acids associated with the pathogen, such as  **reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR)** or a nucleic acid antigen test.


{image:'Figure_20_4_ELISA}
        


{image:'Figure_20_4_Indirect}
        
