index: hide
name: Immunofiltration and Immunochromatographic Assays

For some situations, it may be necessary to detect or quantify antigens or antibodies that are present at very low concentration in solution. Immunofiltration techniques have been developed to make this possible. In  **immunofiltration**, a large volume of fluid is passed through a porous membrane into an absorbent pad. An antigen attached to the porous membrane will capture antibody as it passes; alternatively, we can also attach an antibody to the membrane to capture antigen.

The method of immunofiltration has been adapted in the development of  **immunochromatographic assays**, commonly known as  **lateral flow tests** or strip tests. These tests are quick and easy to perform, making them popular for point-of-care use (i.e., in the doctor’s office) or in-home use. One example is the  **TORCH test** that allows doctors to screen pregnant women or newborns for infection by an array of viruses and other pathogens ( *Toxoplasma*, other viruses, rubella, cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex). In-home  **pregnancy tests** are another widely used example of a lateral flow test ({'Figure_20_4_Torch Figure 20.4.Torch}). Immunofiltration tests are also popular in developing countries, because they are inexpensive and do not require constant refrigeration of the dried reagents. However, the technology is also built into some sophisticated laboratory equipment.

In lateral flow tests ({'Figure_20_4_Lateral Figure 20.4.Lateral}), fluids such as urine are applied to an absorbent pad on the test strip. The fluid flows by capillary action and moves through a stripe of beads with antibodies attached to their surfaces. The fluid in the sample actually hydrates the reagents, which are present in a dried state in the stripe. Antibody-coated beads made of latex or tiny gold particles will bind antigens in the test fluid. The antibody-antigen complexes then flow over a second stripe that has immobilized antibody against the antigen; this stripe will retain the beads that have bound antigen. A third control stripe binds any beads. A red color (from gold particles) or blue (from latex beads) developing at the test line indicates a positive test. If the color only develops at the control line, the test is negative.

Like ELISA techniques, lateral flow tests take advantage of antibody sandwiches, providing sensitivity and specificity. While not as quantitative as ELISA, these tests have the advantage of being fast, inexpensive, and not dependent on special equipment. Thus, they can be performed anywhere by anyone. There are some concerns about putting such powerful diagnostic tests into the hands of people who may not understand the tests’ limitations, such as the possibility of false-positive results. While home pregnancy tests have become widely accepted, at-home antibody-detection tests for diseases like HIV have raised some concerns in the medical community. Some have questioned whether self-administration of such tests should be allowed in the absence of medical personnel who can explain the test results and order appropriate confirmatory tests. However, with growing numbers of lateral flow tests becoming available, and the rapid development of lab-on-a-chip technology ({'Figure_20_0_Chip Figure 20.0.Chip}), home medical tests are likely to become even more commonplace in the future.


{image:'Figure_20_4_Torch}
        


{image:'Figure_20_4_Lateral}
        

 compares some of the key mechanisms and examples of some of the EIAs discussed in this section as well as immunoblots, which were discussed in <link:>.


****

| Type of Assay | Mechanism | Specific Procedures | Examples |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Immunoblots | Uses enzyme-antibody conjugates to identify specific proteins that have been transferred to an absorbent membrane | Western blot: Detects the presence of a particular protein | Detecting the presence of HIV peptides (or peptides from other infectious agents) in patient sera |
| Immunostaining | Uses enzyme-antibody conjugates to stain specific molecules on or in cells | Immunohistochemistry: Used to stain specific cells in a tissue | Stain for presence of CD8 cells in host tissue |
| Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) | Uses enzyme-antibody conjugates to quantify target molecules | Direct ELISA: Uses a single antibody to detect the presence of an antigen | Detection of HIV antigen p24 up to one month after being infected |
| Indirect ELISA: Measures the amount of antibody produced against an antigen | Detection of HIV antibodies in serum |
| Immunochromatographic (lateral flow) assays | Techniques use the capture of flowing, color-labeled antigen-antibody complexes by fixed antibody for disease diagnosis | Sandwich ELISA: Measures the amount of antigen bound by the antibody | Detection of antibodies for various pathogens in patient sera (e.g., rapid strep, malaria dipstick) |
| Pregnancy test detecting human chorionic gonadotrophin in urine |
    
