index: hide
name: Law of Independent Assortment

Mendel’s  **law of independent assortment** states that genes do not influence each other with regard to the sorting of alleles into gametes, and every possible combination of alleles for every gene is equally likely to occur. Independent assortment of genes can be illustrated by the  **dihybrid** cross, a cross between two true-breeding parents that express different traits for two characteristics. Consider the characteristics of seed color and seed texture for two pea plants, one that has wrinkled, green seeds ( *rryy*) and another that has round, yellow seeds ( *RRYY*). Because each parent is homozygous, the law of segregation indicates that the gametes for the wrinkled–green plant all are  *ry*, and the gametes for the round–yellow plant are all  *RY*. Therefore, the F<sub>1</sub> generation of offspring all are  *RrYy*().

The gametes produced by the F<sub>1</sub> individuals must have one allele from each of the two genes. For example, a gamete could get an  *R* allele for the seed shape gene and either a  *Y* or a  *y* allele for the seed color gene. It cannot get both an  *R* and an  *r* allele; each gamete can have only one allele per gene. The law of independent assortment states that a gamete into which an  *r* allele is sorted would be equally likely to contain either a  *Y* or a  *y* allele. Thus, there are four equally likely gametes that can be formed when the  *RrYy* heterozygote is self-crossed, as follows:  *RY*,  *rY*,  *Ry*, and  *ry*. Arranging these gametes along the top and left of a 4 × 4 Punnett square () gives us 16 equally likely genotypic combinations. From these genotypes, we find a phenotypic ratio of 9 round–yellow:3 round–green:3 wrinkled–yellow:1 wrinkled–green (). These are the offspring ratios we would expect, assuming we performed the crosses with a large enough sample size.

The physical basis for the law of independent assortment also lies in meiosis I, in which the different homologous pairs line up in random orientations. Each gamete can contain any combination of paternal and maternal chromosomes (and therefore the genes on them) because the orientation of tetrads on the metaphase plane is random ({'Figure_8_2_7 Figure 8.2.7}).


{image:'Figure_8_2_7}
        
