index: hide
name: Directional Terms

Certain directional anatomical terms appear throughout this and any other anatomy textbook ({'Figure_1_6_2 Figure 1.6.2}). These terms are essential for describing the relative locations of different body structures. For instance, an anatomist might describe one band of tissue as “inferior to” another or a physician might describe a tumor as “superficial to” a deeper body structure. Commit these terms to memory to avoid confusion when you are studying or describing the locations of particular body parts.

  *  **Anterior** (or  **ventral**) Describes the front or direction toward the front of the body. The toes are anterior to the foot.
  *  **Posterior** (or  **dorsal**) Describes the back or direction toward the back of the body. The popliteus is posterior to the patella.
  *  **Superior** (or  **cranial**) describes a position above or higher than another part of the body proper. The orbits are superior to the oris.
  *  **Inferior** (or  **caudal**) describes a position below or lower than another part of the body proper; near or toward the tail (in humans, the coccyx, or lowest part of the spinal column). The pelvis is inferior to the abdomen.
  *  **Lateral** describes the side or direction toward the side of the body. The thumb (pollex) is lateral to the digits.
  *  **Medial** describes the middle or direction toward the middle of the body. The hallux is the medial toe.
  *  **Proximal** describes a position in a limb that is nearer to the point of attachment or the trunk of the body. The brachium is proximal to the antebrachium.
  *  **Distal** describes a position in a limb that is farther from the point of attachment or the trunk of the body. The crus is distal to the femur.
  *  **Superficial** describes a position closer to the surface of the body. The skin is superficial to the bones.
  *  **Deep** describes a position farther from the surface of the body. The brain is deep to the skull.


{image:'Figure_1_6_2}
        
