index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.4.2.1
title: 6.4.2.1 - Global Analysis

The {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} response to future climate and {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} changes can be viewed as two strong and opposing feedbacks ({cite.6.'Gregory_et_al_2009}). The climate–carbon response (γ) determines changes in carbon storage due to changes in climate, and the concentration–carbon response (β) determines changes in storage due to elevated CO2. Climate–carbon cycle {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} responses have been analyzed for eight CMIP5 {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} that performed idealised simulations involving atmospheric CO2 increasing at a prescribed rate of 1% yr–1 ({cite.6.'Arora_et_al_2013}; {Box_6_4 Box 6.4}). There is high confidence that increased atmospheric CO2 will lead to increased land and ocean carbon {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} but by an uncertain amount. Models agree on the sign of land and ocean response to rising CO2 but show only medium and low agreement for the magnitude of ocean and land carbon uptake respectively ({'Figure_6_21 Figure 6.21}). Future climate change will decrease land and ocean carbon uptake compared to the case with constant climate (medium confidence). Models agree on the sign, globally, of land and ocean response to climate change but show low agreement on the magnitude of this response, especially for the land.

{image:'Figure_6_21}

Land and ocean carbon uptake may differ in sign between different regions and between models ({Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_2.6_4_2_3 Section 6.4.2.3}). Inclusion of nitrogen cycle processes in two of the land carbon cycle model components out of these eight reduces the magnitude of the sensitivity to both CO2 and climate ({Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_6.6_4_6_3 Section 6.4.6.3}) and increases the spread across the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}. The CMIP5 spread in ocean sensitivity to CO2 and climate appears reduced compared with C4MIP.

The role of the idealised experiment presented here is to study model processes and understand what causes the differences between models. {cite.6.'Arora_et_al_2013 Arora et al. (2013)} assessed the global carbon budget from these idealised simulations and found that the CO2 contribution to changes in land and ocean carbon storage sensitivity is typically four to five times larger than the sensitivity to climate across the CMIP5 ESMs. The land carbon-{Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} (γ) is larger than the ocean carbon–climate response in all models. Although land and ocean contribute equally to the total carbon–concentration response (β), the {Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} in the land response is greater than for the ocean.
