index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.8.1
title: 9.8.1 - Synthesis Assessment of Model Performance

This chapter has assessed the performance of individual {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} as well as the multi-model mean. In addition, changes between models available now and those that were available at the time of the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} have been documented. The models display a range of abilities to simulate climate characteristics, underlying processes, and phenomena. No model scores high or low in all performance metrics, but some models perform substantially better than others for specific climate variables or phenomena. For a few climate characteristics, the assessment has shown that some classes of models, for example, those with higher horizontal {Glossary.*Resolution resolution}, higher model top or a more complete representation of the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle}, aerosols or chemistry, agree better with observations, although this is not universally true.

{'Figure_9_44 Figure 9.44} provides a synthesis of key model evaluation results for {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} and {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs}. The figure makes use of the calibrated language as defined in {cite.9.'Mastrandrea_et_al_2011 Mastrandrea et al. (2011)}. The x-axis refers to the level of confidence which increases towards the right as suggested by the increasing strength of shading. The level of confidence is a combination of the level of evidence and the degree of agreement. The level of evidence includes the number of studies and quality of observational data. Generally, evidence is most robust when there are multiple, independent studies that evaluate multiple models using high-quality observations. The degree of agreement measures whether different studies come to the same conclusions or not. The figure shows that several important aspects of the climate are simulated well by contemporary models, with varying levels of confidence. The colour coding provides an indication of how model quality has changed from CMIP3 to CMIP5. For example, there is high confidence that the model performance for global mean surface air temperature (TAS) is high, and it is shown in green because there is robust evidence of improvement since CMIP3. By contrast, the diurnal cycle of global mean surface air temperature (TAS-diur) is simulated with medium performance, but there is low confidence in this assessment owing to as yet limited analyses. It should be noted that there are no instances in the figure for which CMIP5 models perform worse than CMIP3 models (something that would have been indicated by the red colour). A description that explains the expert judgment for each of the results presented in {'Figure_9_44 Figure 9.44} can be found in the body of this chapter, with a link to the specific sections given in the figure caption.

{image:'Figure_9_44}

{Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs} have also been evaluated to some extent in this chapter as they are used to provide long-term {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} (in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12}) beyond year 2300, and to provide large ensembles emulating the response of more comprehensive ESMs and allowing probabilistic estimates. Results from the EMIC intercomparison project ({cite.9.'Eby_et_al_2013}; {cite.9.'Zickfeld_et_al_2013}) illustrate the ability to reproduce the large-scale climate changes in {Topics.*Surface_Temperature GMST} ({'Figure_9_8 Figure 9.8}) and OHC ({'Figure_9_17 Figure 9.17}) during the 20th century. The models also estimate {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} fluxes for land and oceans, which are as consistent with observations as are fluxes estimated by ESMs ({'Figure_9_27 Figure 9.27}). This gives confidence that the EMICs, albeit limited in the scope and resolution of information they can provide, can be used for longterm projections compatible with those of ESMs ({cite.9.'Plattner_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Eby_et_al_2013}). Overall, these studies imply that EMICs are well suited for simulations extending beyond the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}.
