index: hide
name: Light-Independent Reactions

After the energy from the sun is converted into chemical energy and temporarily stored in ATP and NADPH molecules (having lifespans of millionths of a second), photoautotrophs have the fuel needed to build multicarbon carbohydrate molecules, which can survive for hundreds of millions of years, for long-term energy storage. The carbon comes from CO<sub>2</sub>, the gas that is a waste product of cellular respiration.

The  **Calvin-Benson cycle** (named for Melvin Calvin [1911–1997] and Andrew Benson [1917–2015]), the biochemical pathway used for fixation of CO<sub>2</sub>, is located within the cytoplasm of photosynthetic bacteria and in the stroma of eukaryotic chloroplasts. The  **light-independent reaction**s of the Calvin cycle can be organized into three basic stages: fixation, reduction, and regeneration (see <link:> for a detailed illustration of the Calvin cycle).

  *  **Fixation**: The enzyme  **ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase (RuBisCO)** catalyzes the addition of a CO<sub>2</sub> to  **ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP)**. This results in the production of  **3-phosphoglycerate** ( **3-PGA**).
  *  **Reduction**: Six molecules of both ATP and NADPH (from the light-dependent reactions) are used to convert 3-PGA into glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). Some G3P is then used to build glucose.
  *  **Regeneration**: The remaining G3P not used to synthesize glucose is used to regenerate RuBP, enabling the system to continue CO<sub>2</sub> fixation. Three more molecules of ATP are used in these regeneration reactions.

The Calvin cycle is used extensively by plants and photoautotrophic bacteria, and the enzyme RuBisCO is said to be the most plentiful enzyme on earth, composing 30%–50% of the total soluble protein in plant chloroplasts. However, besides its prevalent use in photoautotrophs, the Calvin cycle is also used by many nonphotosynthetic chemoautotrophs to fix CO<sub>2</sub>. Additionally, other bacteria and archaea use alternative systems for CO<sub>2</sub> fixation. Although most bacteria using Calvin cycle alternatives are chemoautotrophic, certain green sulfur photoautotrophic bacteria have been also shown to use an alternative CO<sub>2</sub> fixation pathway.
