index: hide
name: Photosynthetic Structures in Eukaryotes and Prokaryotes

In all  **phototrophic eukaryotes**, photosynthesis takes place inside a  **chloroplast**, an organelle that arose in eukaryotes by endosymbiosis of a photosynthetic bacterium (see <link:>). These chloroplasts are enclosed by a double membrane with inner and outer layers. Within the chloroplast is a third membrane that forms stacked, disc-shaped photosynthetic structures called  **thylakoid**s ({'Figure_8_6_PhotoMemb Figure 8.6.PhotoMemb}). A stack of thylakoids is called a  **granum**, and the space surrounding the granum within the chloroplast is called  **stroma**.

Photosynthetic membranes in prokaryotes, by contrast, are not organized into distinct membrane-enclosed organelles; rather, they are infolded regions of the plasma membrane. In cyanobacteria, for example, these infolded regions are also referred to as thylakoids. In either case, embedded within the thylakoid membranes or other photosynthetic bacterial membranes are  **photosynthetic pigment** molecules organized into one or more photosystems, where light energy is actually converted into chemical energy.

Photosynthetic pigments within the photosynthetic membranes are organized into  **photosystem** **s**, each of which is composed of a light-harvesting (antennae) complex and a reaction center. The  **light-harvesting complex** consists of multiple proteins and associated pigments that each may absorb light energy and, thus, become excited. This energy is transferred from one pigment molecule to another until eventually (after about a millionth of a second) it is delivered to the reaction center. Up to this point, only energy—not electrons—has been transferred between molecules. The  **reaction center** contains a pigment molecule that can undergo oxidation upon excitation, actually giving up an electron. It is at this step in  **photosynthesis** that light energy is converted into an excited electron.

Different kinds of light-harvesting pigments absorb unique patterns of wavelengths (colors) of visible light. Pigments reflect or transmit the wavelengths they cannot absorb, making them appear the corresponding color. Examples of photosynthetic pigments (molecules used to absorb solar energy) are  **bacteriochlorophyll**s (green, purple, or red),  **carotenoid**s (orange, red, or yellow),  **chlorophyll**s (green),  **phycocyanins** (blue), and  **phycoerythrins** (red). By having mixtures of pigments, an organism can absorb energy from more wavelengths. Because photosynthetic bacteria commonly grow in competition for sunlight, each type of photosynthetic bacteria is optimized for harvesting the wavelengths of light to which it is commonly exposed, leading to stratification of microbial communities in aquatic and soil ecosystems by light quality and penetration.

Once the light harvesting complex transfers the energy to the reaction center, the reaction center delivers its high-energy electrons, one by one, to an electron carrier in an  **electron transport system**, and electron transfer through the  **ETS** is initiated. The ETS is similar to that used in  **cellular respiration** and is embedded within the photosynthetic membrane. Ultimately, the electron is used to produce  **NADH** or  **NADPH**. The  **electrochemical gradient** that forms across the photosynthetic membrane is used to generate  **ATP** by chemiosmosis through the process of  **photophosphorylation**, another example of  **oxidative phosphorylation** ({'Figure_8_6_GenPhoto Figure 8.6.GenPhoto}).


{image:'Figure_8_6_PhotoMemb}
        


{image:'Figure_8_6_GenPhoto}
        
