index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.9
title: 4.2.2.9 - Decadal Trends in Arctic Sea Ice

The average decadal extent of Arctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} has decreased in every season and in every successive decade since satellite observations commenced. The data set is robust with continuous and consistent global coverage on a daily basis thereby providing very reliable {Glossary.*Trend trend} results (very high confidence). The annual Arctic sea ice cover very likely declined within the range 3.5 to 4.1% per decade (0.45 to 0.51 million km2 per decade) during the period 1979–2012 with larger changes occurring in summer and autumn (very high confidence). Much larger changes apply to the perennial ice (the summer minimum extent) which very likely decreased in the range from 9.4 % to 13.6 % per decade (0.73 to 1.07 million km2 per decade) and multiyear sea ice (more than 2 years old) which very likely declined in the range from 11.0 % to 16.0% per decade (0.66 to 0.98 million km2 per decade) (very high confidence; {'Figure_4_4 Figure 4.4}b). The rate of decrease in ice area has been greater than that in extent ({'Figure_4_4 Figure 4.4}b) because the ice concentration has also decreased. The decline in multiyear ice cover as observed by QuikScat from 1992 to 1910 is presented in {'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}b and shown to be consistent with passive microwave data ({'Figure_4_4 Figure 4.4}b).

The decrease in perennial and multi-year ice coverage has resulted in a strong decrease in ice thickness, and hence in ice volume. Declassified submarine sonar measurements, covering ~38% of the Arctic Ocean, indicate an overall mean winter thickness of 3.64 m in 1980, which likely decreased by 1.8 [1.3 to 2.3] m by 2008 (high confidence, {'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}c). Between 1975 and 2000, the steepest rate of decrease was 0.08 m yr–1 in 1990 compared to a slightly higher winter/summer rate of 0.10/0.20 m yr–1 in the 5-year ICESat record (2003–2008). This combined analysis ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}c) shows a long-term trend of sea ice thinning that spans five decades. Satellite measurements made in the period 2010–2012 show a decrease in basin-scale sea ice volume compared to those made over the period 2003–2008 (medium confidence). The Arctic sea ice is becoming increasingly seasonal with thinner ice, and it will take several years for any recovery.

The decreases in both concentration and thickness reduces sea ice strength reducing its resistance to wind {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}, and drift speed has increased ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}d) ({cite.4.'Rampal_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Spreen_et_al_2011}). Other significant changes to the Arctic Ocean sea ice include lengthening in the duration of the surface melt on perennial ice of 6 days per decade ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}e) and a nearly 3-month lengthening of the ice-free season in the {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} from the East Siberian Sea to the western Beaufort Sea.
