index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Gram-positive bacteria are a very large and diverse group of microorganisms. Understanding their taxonomy and knowing their unique features is important for diagnostics and treatment of infectious diseases.
  * Gram-positive bacteria are classified into  **high G+C gram-positive** and  **low G+C gram-positive** bacteria, based on the prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their genome
  * Actinobacteria is the taxonomic name of the class of high G+C gram-positive bacteria. This class includes the genera  *Actinomyces, Arthrobacter, Corynebacterium, Frankia, Gardnerella, Micrococcus, Mycobacterium, Nocardia*,  *Propionibacterium, Rhodococcus,* and  *Streptomyces*. Some representatives of these genera are used in industry; others are human or animal pathogens.
  * Examples of high G+C gram-positive bacteria that are human pathogens include  *Mycobacterium*  *tuberculosis*, which causes tuberculosis;  *M. leprae*, which causes leprosy (Hansen’s disease); and  *Corynebacterium*  *diphtheriae*, which causes diphtheria.
  *  *Clostridia* spp. are low G+C gram-positive bacteria that are generally obligate anaerobes and can form endospores. Pathogens in this genus include  *C.*  *perfringens* (gas gangrene),  *C. tetani* (tetanus), and  *C. botulinum* (botulism).
  * Lactobacillales include the genera  *Enterococcus*,  *Lactobacillus*,  *Leuconostoc*, and  *Streptococcus. Streptococcus* is responsible for many human diseases, including pharyngitis (strep throat), scarlet fever, rheumatic fever, glomerulonephritis, pneumonia, and other respiratory infections.
  * Bacilli is a taxonomic class of low G+C gram-positive bacteria that include rod-shaped and coccus-shaped species, including the genera  *Bacillus* and  *Staphylococcus*.  *B. anthracis* causes anthrax,  *B. cereus* may cause opportunistic infections of the gastrointestinal tract, and  *S.*  *aureus* strains can cause a wide range of infections and diseases, many of which are highly resistant to antibiotics.
  *  *Mycoplasma* spp. are very small,  **pleomorphic** low G+C gram-positive bacteria that lack cell walls.  *M. pneumoniae* causes atypical pneumonia.
