index: hide
name: Low G+C Gram-positive Bacteria

The  **low G+C gram-positive bacteria** have less than 50% guanine and cytosine in their DNA, and this group of bacteria includes a number of genera of bacteria that are pathogenic.

## Clostridia

One large and diverse class of  **low G+C gram-positive bacteria** is Clostridia. The best studied genus of this class is  **Clostridium**. These rod-shaped bacteria are generally obligate anaerobes that produce endospores and can be found in anaerobic habitats like soil and aquatic sediments rich in organic nutrients. The endospores may survive for many years.

 *Clostridium* spp. produce more kinds of protein toxins than any other bacterial genus, and several species are human pathogens.  *C. perfringens* is the third most common cause of food poisoning in the United States and is the causative agent of an even more serious disease called  **gas gangrene**. Gas gangrene occurs when  *C. perfringens* endospores enter a wound and germinate, becoming viable bacterial cells and producing a toxin that can cause the necrosis (death) of tissue.  *C. tetani*, which causes  **tetanus**, produces a neurotoxin that is able to enter neurons, travel to regions of the central nervous system where it blocks the inhibition of nerve impulses involved in muscle contractions, and cause a life-threatening spastic paralysis.  *C. botulinum* produces  **botulinum neurotoxin**, the most lethal biological toxin known. Botulinum toxin is responsible for rare but frequently fatal cases of  **botulism**. The toxin blocks the release of acetylcholine in neuromuscular junctions, causing flaccid paralysis. In very small concentrations, botulinum toxin has been used to treat muscle pathologies in humans and in a cosmetic procedure to eliminate wrinkles.  *C. difficile* is a common source of hospital-acquired infections ({'Figure_4_4_Clostridia Figure 4.4.Clostridia}) that can result in serious and even fatal cases of colitis (inflammation of the large intestine). Infections often occur in patients who are immunosuppressed or undergoing antibiotic therapy that alters the normal microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract.  lists the genera, species, and related diseases for Clostridia.


{image:'Figure_4_4_Clostridia}
        

## Lactobacillales

The order  **Lactobacillales** comprises low G+C gram-positive bacteria that include both  **bacilli** and  **cocci** in the genera  **Lactobacillus**,  **Leuconostoc**,  **Enterococcus**, and  **Streptococcus**. Bacteria of the latter three genera typically are spherical or ovoid and often form chains.

 *Streptococcus*, the name of which comes from the Greek word for  *twisted chain*, is responsible for many types of infectious diseases in humans. Species from this genus, often referred to as  **streptococci**, are usually classified by serotypes called Lancefield groups, and by their ability to lyse red blood cells when grown on blood agar.

 *S. pyogenes* belongs to the  **Lancefield group** A, β-hemolytic  *Streptococcus*. This species is considered a pyogenic pathogen because of the associated pus production observed with infections it causes ({'Figure_4_4_Strep Figure 4.4.Strep}).  *S. pyogenes* is the most common cause of bacterial pharyngitis ( **strep throat**); it is also an important cause of various skin infections that can be relatively mild (e.g.,  **impetigo**) or life threatening (e.g.,  **necrotizing fasciitis**, also known as flesh eating disease), life threatening.


{image:'Figure_4_4_Strep}
        

The nonpyogenic (i.e., not associated with pus production) streptococci are a group of streptococcal species that are not a taxon but are grouped together because they inhabit the human mouth. The  **nonpyogenic streptococci** do not belong to any of the Lancefield groups. Most are commensals, but a few, such as  *S. mutans*, are implicated in the development of dental caries.

 *S. pneumoniae* (commonly referred to as pneumococcus), is a  **Streptococcus** species that also does not belong to any  **Lancefield group**.  *S. pneumoniae* cells appear microscopically as diplococci, pairs of cells, rather than the long chains typical of most streptococci. Scientists have known since the 19th century that  *S. pneumoniae* causes  **pneumonia** and other respiratory infections. However, this bacterium can also cause a wide range of other diseases, including meningitis, septicemia, osteomyelitis, and endocarditis, especially in newborns, the elderly, and patients with immunodeficiency.

## Bacilli

The name of the class  **Bacilli** suggests that it is made up of bacteria that are bacillus in shape, but it is a morphologically diverse class that includes bacillus-shaped and cocccus-shaped genera. Among the many genera in this class are two that are very important clinically:  **Bacillus** and  **Staphylococcus**.

Bacteria in the genus  *Bacillus* are bacillus in shape and can produce  **endospores**. They include aerobes or facultative anaerobes. A number of  *Bacillus* spp. are used in various industries, including the production of antibiotics (e.g., barnase), enzymes (e.g., alpha-amylase, BamH1 restriction endonuclease), and detergents (e.g., subtilisin).

Two notable pathogens belong to the genus  *Bacillus. B. anthracis* is the pathogen that causes  **anthrax**, a severe disease that affects wild and domesticated animals and can spread from infected animals to humans. Anthrax manifests in humans as charcoal-black ulcers on the skin, severe enterocolitis, pneumonia, and brain damage due to swelling. If untreated, anthrax is lethal.  *B. cereus*, a closely related species, is a pathogen that may cause food poisoning. It is a rod-shaped species that forms chains. Colonies appear milky white with irregular shapes when cultured on blood agar ({'Figure_4_4_Bacillus Figure 4.4.Bacillus}). One other important species is  *B. thuringiensis*. This bacterium produces a number of substances used as insecticides because they are toxic for insects.


{image:'Figure_4_4_Bacillus}
        

The genus  *Staphylococcus* also belongs to the class Bacilli, even though its shape is coccus rather than a bacillus. The name  *Staphylococcus* comes from a Greek word for  *bunches of grapes*, which describes their microscopic appearance in culture ({'Figure_4_4_SAureus Figure 4.4.SAureus}).  *Staphylococcus* spp. are facultative anaerobic, halophilic, and nonmotile. The two best-studied species of this genus are  *S. epidermidis* and  *S. aureus*.


{image:'Figure_4_4_SAureus}
        

 *S. epidermidis*, whose main habitat is the human skin, is thought to be nonpathogenic for humans with healthy immune systems, but in patients with immunodeficiency, it may cause infections in skin wounds and prostheses (e.g., artificial joints, heart valves) *. S. epidermidis* is also an important cause of infections associated with intravenous catheters. This makes it a dangerous pathogen in hospital settings, where many patients may be immunocompromised. **

Strains of  *S. aureus* cause a wide variety of infections in humans, including skin infections that produce boils, carbuncles, cellulitis, or impetigo. Certain strains of  *S. aureus* produce a substance called  **enterotoxin**, which can cause severe enteritis, often called staph food poisoning. Some strains of  *S. aureus* produce the toxin responsible for  **toxic shock syndrome**, which can result in cardiovascular collapse and death.

Many strains of  *S. aureus* have developed resistance to antibiotics. Some antibiotic-resistant strains are designated as  **methicillin-resistant S. aureus** ( **MRSA**) and  **vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA)**. These strains are some of the most difficult to treat because they exhibit resistance to nearly all available antibiotics, not just methicillin and vancomycin. Because they are difficult to treat with antibiotics, infections can be lethal. MRSA and VRSA are also contagious, posing a serious threat in hospitals, nursing homes, dialysis facilities, and other places where there are large populations of elderly, bedridden, and/or immunocompromised patients.  lists the genera, species, and related diseases for bacilli.

## Mycoplasmas

Although  **Mycoplasma** spp. do not possess a cell wall and, therefore, are not stained by Gram-stain reagents, this genus is still included with the low G+C gram-positive bacteria. The genus  *Mycoplasma* includes more than 100 species, which share several unique characteristics. They are very small cells, some with a diameter of about 0.2 μm, which is smaller than some large viruses. They have no cell walls and, therefore, are  **pleomorphic**, meaning that they may take on a variety of shapes and can even resemble very small animal cells. Because they lack a characteristic shape, they can be difficult to identify. One species,  *M. pneumoniae*, causes the mild form of  **pneumonia** known as “ **walking pneumonia**” or “ **atypical pneumonia**.” This form of pneumonia is typically less severe than forms caused by other bacteria or viruses.

 summarizes the characteristics of notable genera low G+C Gram-positive bacteria.


****

| Example Genus | Microscopic Morphology | Unique Characteristics |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **Bacillus** | Large, gram-positive bacillus | Aerobes or facultative anaerobes; form endospores;  *B. anthracis* causes anthrax in cattle and humans,  *B. cereus* may cause food poisoning |
|  **Clostridium** | Gram-positive bacillus | Strict anaerobes; form endospores; all known species are pathogenic, causing tetanus, gas gangrene, botulism, and colitis |
|  **Enterococcus** | Gram-positive coccus; forms microscopic pairs in culture (resembling  *Streptococcus pneumoniae*) | Anaerobic aerotolerant bacteria, abundant in the human gut, may cause urinary tract and other infections in the nosocomial environment |
|  **Lactobacillus** | Gram-positive bacillus | Facultative anaerobes; ferment sugars into lactic acid; part of the vaginal microbiota; used as probiotics |
|  **Leuconostoc** | Gram-positive coccus; may form microscopic chains in culture | Fermenter, used in food industry to produce sauerkraut and kefir |
|  **Mycoplasma** | The smallest bacteria; appear pleomorphic under electron microscope | Have no cell wall; classified as low G+C Gram-positive bacteria because of their genome;  *M. pneumoniae* causes “walking” pneumonia |
|  **Staphylococcus** | Gram-positive coccus; forms microscopic clusters in culture that resemble bunches of grapes | Tolerate high salt concentration; facultative anaerobes; produce catalase;  *S. aureus* can also produce coagulase and toxins responsible for local (skin) and generalized infections |
|  **Streptococcus** | Gram-positive coccus; forms chains or pairs in culture | Diverse genus; classified into groups based on sharing certain antigens; some species cause hemolysis and may produce toxins responsible for human local (throat) and generalized disease |
|  **Ureaplasma** | Similar to  *Mycoplasma* | Part of the human vaginal and lower urinary tract microbiota; may cause inflammation, sometimes leading to internal scarring and infertility |
    
