index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 14.8.7
title: 14.8.7 - Africa

The African continent encompasses a variety of climatic zones. Here the continent is divided into four major sub-regions: Sahara (SAH), Western Africa (WAF), Eastern Africa (EAF) and Southern Africa (SAF). A fifth Mediterranean {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} to the north of Sahara is discussed in {Chapters.14.14_8.14_8_6 Section 14.8.6}. In tropical latitudes, rainfall follows {Glossary.*Insolation insolation} (this simplified picture is modified by the presence of orography, especially in the Great Horn of Africa, the geography of the coastline, and by the oceans). The most relevant phenomena affecting {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} are the monsoons ({Chapters.14.14_2.14_2_4 Section 14.2.4}), {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} ({Chapters.14.14_4 Section 14.4}), Indian and Atlantic Ocean SSTs ({Glossary.*Indian_Ocean_Dipole IOD}, {Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_3 Section 14.3.3}; AMM {Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_4 Section 14.3.4}; {Glossary.*Atlantic_Multi_decadal_Oscillation_Variability AMO} {Chapters.14.14_7.14_7_6 Section 14.7.6}) and the atmospheric {Glossary.*Walker_Circulation Walker Circulation} ({Chapters.2.2_7.2_7_5 Section 2.7.5}). Tropical cyclones impact East African and Madagascan coastal regions ({Chapters.14.14_6.14_6_1 Section 14.6.1}) and ETCs clearly impact southern Africa ({Chapters.14.14_6.14_6_2 Section 14.6.2}).

Sub-Saharan Sahelian climate is dominated by the monsoonal system that brings rainfall to the region during only one season ({cite.14.'Polcher_et_al_2011}). Most of the rain between May/June and September comes from mesoscale ‘squall line’ systems that travel short distances in their {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} (~1000 to 2000 km), and whose distribution is somewhat modified by the synoptic scale African Easterly Wave (Ruti and Dell’Aquila, 2010). The onset of the rainy season in West Africa is a key parameter triggering changes in the vegetation and surface properties, that implies feedbacks to the local atmospheric heat and moisture cycle. The length and frequency of dry spells as well as the length or cumulated rainfall of the season also affect this. All are affected by a large interannual variability ({cite.14.'Janicot_et_al_2011}). When evaluating models their ability to reproduce such characteristics of the African {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon} is essential. A large effect of natural multi-decadal {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} and warming of the oceans on Sahel rainfall is very likely ({cite.14.'Hoerling_et_al_2006}; {cite.14.'Ting_et_al_2009}, 2011; {cite.14.'Mohino_et_al_2011}; Rodriguez-Fonseca et al., 2011).

East Africa experiences a semi-annual rainfall cycle, driven by the {Glossary.*Inter_Tropical_Convergence_Zone ITCZ} movement across the equator. Direct links between the region’s rainfall and ENSO have been demonstrated ({cite.14.'Giannini_et_al_2008}) and references therein), but variations in Indian Ocean SST (phases of the IOD) are recognized as the dominant driver of east African rainfall variability ({cite.14.'Marchant_et_al_2007}). This feature acts to enhance rainfall through either anomalous low-level easterly flow of moist air into the continent ({cite.14.'Shongwe_et_al_2011}), or a weakening of the low-level westerly flow over the northern Indian Ocean that transports moisture away from the continent ({cite.14.'Black_et_al_2003}). Although the effect of the IOD is evident in the short rainy season, {cite.14.'Shongwe_et_al_2011 Shongwe et al. (2011)} do not find a similar relationship for the long rains. {cite.14.'Williams_and_Funk_2011 Williams and Funk (2011)}, however, argue for a reduction in the long rains over Kenya and Ethiopia in response to warmer Indian Ocean SSTs.

Variability in southern Africa’s climate is strongly influenced by its adjacent oceans ({cite.14.'Rouault_et_al_2003}; {cite.14.'Hansingo_and_Reason_2008}, 2009; {cite.14.'Hermes_and_Reason_2009}) as well as by ENSO ({cite.14.'Vigaud_et_al_2009}; {cite.14.'Pohl_et_al_2010}). Although it is generally observed that El Niño events correspond to conditions of below-average rainfall over much of southern Africa ({cite.14.'Mason_2001}; {cite.14.'Giannini_et_al_2008}; {cite.14.'Manatsa_et_al_2008}) the ENSO {Glossary.*Teleconnection teleconnection} is not linear, but rather has complex influence in which a number of regimes of local rainfall response can be identified ({cite.14.'Fauchereau_et_al_2009}). The extreme southwestern parts of southern Africa receive rainfall in austral winter brought by mid-latitude frontal systems mostly associated with passing ETCs, but the majority of the region experiences a single summer rainfall season occurring between November and April. A semi-permanent zone of sub-tropical convergence is a major contributor to summer rainfall in sub-tropical southern Africa ({cite.14.'Fauchereau_et_al_2009}; {cite.14.'Vigaud_et_al_2012}).

Because of its exceptional magnitude and its clear link to global SST, 20th century decadal rainfall variability in the Sahel is a test of {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} ability to produce realistic long-term changes in tropical precipitation. Despite biases in the region ({cite.14.'Cook_and_Vizy_2006}) the CMIP3 coupled models overall can capture the observed correlation between Sahel rainfall and basin-wide area averaged SST variability ({cite.14.'Biasutti_et_al_2008}) even though individual models may fail, especially at interannual time scales ({cite.14.'Lau_et_al_2006}; {cite.14.'Joly_et_al_2007}). Recently, {cite.14.'Ackerley_et_al_2011 Ackerley et al. (2011)} used a perturbed physics {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} and reached a similar result for the role of atmospheric sulphate, confirming previous results ({cite.14.'Rotstayn_and_Lohmann_2002}; {cite.14.'Held_et_al_2005}). Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, only limited information about improved performance has been documented and only in WAF have major efforts been focussing on relating model behaviour with ability to simulate local climate processes in such details. However, in a comparative study of the ability of CMIP3 and CMIP5 to simulate multiple SST–Africa teleconnections, {cite.14.'Rowell_2013 Rowell (2013)} found varying degrees of success in simulating these. In particular, no clear indication of an improvement in the CMIP5 models vs. the CMI3 models was identified.

In {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of the 21st century, the CMIP3 models produced both significant drying and significant moistening ({cite.14.'Held_et_al_2005}; {cite.14.'Biasutti_and_Giannini_2006}; {cite.14.'Cook_and_Vizy_2006}; {cite.14.'Lau_et_al_2006}), and the mechanisms by which a model dries or wets the Sahel are not fully understood ({cite.14.'Cook_2008}). At least qualitatively, the CMIP3 ensemble simulates a more robust response during the pre-onset and the demise portion of the rainy season ({cite.14.'Biasutti_and_Sobel_2009}; {cite.14.'Seth_et_al_2011}). Rainfall is projected to decrease in the early phase of the seasons—implying a small delay in the main rainy season, but is projected to increase at the end of the season—implying an intensification of late-season rains (d’Orgeval et al., 2006), although this appears to be less robust in the CMIP5 models ({Chapters.14.14_2.14_2_4 Section 14.2.4}). Projections of a change in the timing of the rains is common to other monsoon regions ({cite.14.'Li_et_al_2006}; {cite.14.'Biasutti_and_Sobel_2009}; {cite.14.'Seth_et_al_2011}), including southern Africa.

The relevance of a local effect is supported by several lines of evidence. There is observational evidence that local {Glossary.*Soil_moisture soil moisture} gradients can trigger convective systems and that these surface contrasts are as important as topography for generating these systems, which bring most of the rain to the region ({cite.14.'Taylor_et_al_2011a}, 2011b). Additional evidence comes from simulations of future rainfall changes in West Africa by {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model RCMs} subject to coupled model-derived boundary conditions ({cite.14.'Patricola_and_Cook_2010}), documenting a wetting response of the Sahel to increased GHG in the absence of other {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}. But the relative importance of this effect versus the response to SST trends is not well quantified, mostly due to the limitation of using a single RCM.

An evaluation of six {Glossary.*Semi_empirical_model GCMs} over East Africa by {cite.14.'Conway_et_al_2007 Conway et al. (2007)} reveals no clear multi-model {Glossary.*Trend trend} in mean annual rainfall by the 2080s, but some indications of increased SON and decreased March, April and May (MAM) rainfall are noted. They found inconsistency in how the models represent changes in the IOB and consequent changes in rainfall over East Africa. {cite.14.'Shongwe_et_al_2011 Shongwe et al. (2011)} analysed an ensemble of 12 CMIP3 GCMs (forced with A1B {Topics.*Emissions emissions}). They found widespread increases in short season (OND) rainfall including extreme precipitation across the region, with statistically significant ensemble mean increases. For the long rains (MAM), similar changes in the sign and magnitude of mean and extreme seasonal rainfall were seen, but model skill in simulating the MAM season is relatively poor. The changes shown for the short rains are consistent with a differential warming of 21st century Indian Ocean SSTs, which leads to a positive IOD-like state (see {Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_3 Section 14.3.3}). The atmospheric consequence of this is a weakening of the descending branch of the East African Walker Cell and enhancement of low-level moisture convergence over east Africa ({cite.14.'Vecchi_and_Soden_2007a}; {cite.14.'Shongwe_et_al_2011}).

In an assessment of 19 CMIP3 models run with the A1B emissions forcing, {cite.14.'Giannini_et_al_2008 Giannini et al. (2008)} note a tendency toward a persistent El Niño-like pattern (see {Chapters.14.14_4 Section 14.4}) in the equatorial Pacific along with a decrease in rainfall over southern Africa. Dynamical {Glossary.*Downscaling downscaling} of a single GCM by {cite.14.'Engelbrecht_et_al_2011 Engelbrecht et al. (2011)} shows—for the austral winter—an intensification of the southern edge of the subtropical high pressure belt resulting in southward displacement of the mid-latitude systems that bring frontal rain to the south western parts of the continent, thus resulting in decrease in rainfall. The decrease in summer rainfall is consistent with high-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} (18 km) RCM simulations done by {cite.14.'Haensler_et_al_2011 Haensler et al. (2011)} which indicate widespread reductions in rainfall over southern Africa under the A1B scenario.

{cite.14.'Shongwe_et_al_2009 Shongwe et al. (2009)} identified reduction in spring (SON) rainfall throughout the eastern parts of southern Africa. There is good consensus amongst the models used, with the spring anomalies indicating a trend toward later onset of the summer rainy season. Autumn (MAM) reductions are shown for most of southern Africa while eastern South Africa experiences no change and eastern parts of southern Africa show a small increase.

{'Table_14_2 Table 14.2} provides an overall assessment of CMIP5 quality for simulations of temperature, precipitation, and main phenomena in the different sub-regions of Africa. Overall, confidence in the projected precipitation changes is at best medium. This is owing to the overall modest ability of models to capture the most important phenomena having a strong control on African climates ({'Table_14_3 Table 14.3}).

The ability of {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} to simulate historical climate, its change, and its variability, has improved in many aspects since the AR4 (see {Chapters.9.9_6.9_6_1 Section 9.6.1}). But for Africa there is no clear evidence that the modest increase in resolution and a better representation of the land surface processes in many CMIP5 models have resulted in marked improvements (e.g., {'Figure_9_39 Figure 9.39}). The CMIP5 models {Glossary.*Projection projection} for this century is further warming in all seasons in the considered four sub-regions, while precipitation show some distinct sub-regional and seasonally dependent changes. In the October to March half year all four regions are projected to receive practically unaltered precipitation amounts by 2081–2100, although somewhat elevated in {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}. In the April to September half year SAH, WAF and EAF will experience little change but a quite notable reduction in SAF is projected (see {'Table_14_1 Table 14.1},

Figures AI.40 to AI.51). This is consistent with the results from CMIP3 as depicted in {'Figure_14_23 Figure 14.23} in the West African monsoon wet season and austral summer. High resolution information provided by the Japanese high-resolution model ensemble also matches this finding.

{image:'Figure_14_23}

In summary, given models’ ability to capture local processes, large scale climate evolution and their linkages, it is very likely that all of Africa will continue to warm during the 21st century. The overall quality of the CMIP5 models imply, that SAH already very dry is very likely to remain very dry. But there is low confidence in projection statements about drying or wetting of WAF. Owing to models’ ability to capture the overall monsoonal behaviour, there is medium confidence in projections of a small delay in the rainy season with an increase at the end of the season. There is medium confidence in projections showing little change in mean precipitation in EAF and reduced precipitation in the Austral winter in SAF, as models tend to represent Indian Ocean SST developments with credibility. Likewise, increasing rainfall in EAF is likely for the short rainy season, but low confidence exists in projections regarding drying or wetting in the long rainy season.
