index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.5.5
title: 8.3.5.5 - Impacts of Surface Change on Climate

{cite.8.'Davin_et_al_2007 Davin et al. (2007)} argues that the {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} to land use forcing is lower than that for other {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}, due to its spatial distribution but also the role of non-radiative processes. Indeed, in addition to the impact on the surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo}, {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} also modifies the evaporation and surface roughness, with counterbalancing consequences on the lower {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} temperature. There is increasing evidence that the impact of land use on {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration}—a non-RF on climate—is comparable to, but of opposite sign than, the albedo effect, so that RF is not as useful a {Glossary.*Metric metric} as it is for gases and aerosols. For instance, {cite.8.'Findell_et_al_2007 Findell et al. (2007)} climate simulations show a negligible impact of land use change on the global mean temperature, although there are some significant regional changes.

Numerical climate experiments demonstrate that the impact of land use on climate is much more complex than just the RF. This is due in part to the very heterogeneous nature of land use change ({cite.8.'Barnes_and_Roy_2008}), but mostly due to the impact on the {Glossary.*Hydrological_cycle hydrological cycle} through evapotranspiration, root depth and cloudiness (van der Molen et al., 2011). As a consequence, the forcing on climate is not purely radiative and the net impact on the {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} may be either positive or negative depending on the latitude ({cite.8.'Bala_et_al_2007}). Davin and de Noblet-Ducoudre (2010) analyses the impact on climate of large-scale {Glossary.*Deforestation deforestation}; the albedo cooling effect dominates for high latitude whereas reduced evapotranspiration dominates in the tropics. This latitudinal {Glossary.*Trend trend} is confirmed by observations of the temperature difference between open land and nearby forested land ({cite.8.'Lee_et_al_2011}).

Irrigated areas have continuously increased during the 20th century although a slowdown has been observed in recent decades ({cite.8.'Bonfils_and_Lobell_2007}). There is clear evidence that irrigation leads to local cooling of several degrees ({cite.8.'Kueppers_et_al_2007}). Irrigation also affects cloudiness and precipitation ({cite.8.'Puma_and_Cook_2010}). In the United States, {cite.8.'DeAngelis_et_al_2010 DeAngelis et al. (2010)} found that irrigation in the Great Plains in the summer produced enhanced precipitation in the Midwest 1000 km to the northeast.
