index: hide
name: The trp Operon: A Repressible Operon

# The  *trp* Operon: A Repressible Operon

Bacteria such as  *Escherichia coli* need amino acids to survive, and are able to synthesize many of them.  **Tryptophan** is one such amino acid that  *E. coli* can either ingest from the environment or synthesize using enzymes that are encoded by five genes. These five genes are next to each other in what is called the  **tryptophan (trp) operon** ({'Figure_16_2_1 Figure 16.2.1}). The genes are transcribed into a single mRNA, which is then translated to produce all five enzymes. If tryptophan is present in the environment, then  *E. coli* does not need to synthesize it and the  *trp* operon is switched off. However, when tryptophan availability is low, the switch controlling the operon is turned on, the mRNA is transcribed, the enzyme proteins are translated, and tryptophan is synthesized.


{image:'Figure_16_2_1}
        

The  *trp* operon includes three important regions: the coding region, the  *trp* operator and the  *trp* promoter. The coding region includes the genes for the five tryptophan biosynthesis enzymes. Just before the coding region is the  **transcriptional start site**. The promoter sequence, to which RNA polymerase binds to initiate transcription, is before or “upstream” of the transcriptional start site. Between the promoter and the transcriptional start site is the operator region.

The  *trp* **operator** contains the DNA code to which the  *trp* repressor protein can bind. However, the repressor alone cannot bind to the operator. When tryptophan is present in the cell, two tryptophan molecules bind to the  *trp* repressor, which changes the shape of the repressor protein to a form that can bind to the  *trp* operator. Binding of the tryptophan–repressor complex at the operator physically prevents the RNA polymerase from binding to the promoter and transcribing the downstream genes.

When tryptophan is not present in the cell, the repressor by itself does not bind to the operator, the polymerase can transcribe the enzyme genes, and tryptophan is synthesized. Because the repressor protein actively binds to the operator to keep the genes turned off, the  *trp* operon is said to be  *negatively regulated* and the proteins that bind to the operator to silence  *trp* expression are  **negative regulators**.
