index: hide
name: The lac Operon: An Inducible Operon

# The  *lac* Operon: An Inducible Operon

The third type of gene regulation in prokaryotic cells occurs through  *inducible operons*, which have proteins that bind to activate or repress transcription depending on the local environment and the needs of the cell. The  *lac* operon is a typical inducible operon. As mentioned previously,  *E. coli* is able to use other sugars as energy sources when glucose concentrations are low. One such sugar source is lactose. The  **lac operon** encodes the genes necessary to acquire and process the lactose from the local environment. The Z gene of the  *lac* operon encodes beta-galactosidase, which breaks lactose down to glucose and galactose.

However, for the  *lac* operon to be activated, two conditions must be met. First, the level of glucose must be very low or non-existent. Second, lactose must be present. Only when glucose is absent and lactose is present will the  *lac* operon be transcribed (). In the absence of glucose, the binding of the CAP protein makes transcription of the  *lac* operon more effective.  When lactose is present, it binds to the  *lac* repressor and changes its shape so that it cannot bind to the  *lac* operator to prevent transcription. This combination of conditions makes sense for the cell, because it would be energetically wasteful to synthesize the enzymes to process lactose if glucose was plentiful or lactose was not available.

If glucose is present, then CAP fails to bind to the promoter sequence to activate transcription. If lactose is absent, then the repressor binds to the operator to prevent transcription. If either of these conditions is met, then transcription remains off. Only when glucose is absent and lactose is present is the  *lac* operon transcribed ().


****

| Glucose | CAP binds | Lactose | Repressor binds | Transcription |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| + | - | - | + | No |
| + | - | + | - | Some |
| - | + | - | + | No |
| - | + | + | - | Yes |
    
