index: hide
name: The Aorta

The  **aorta** is the largest artery in the body ({'Figure_21_5_4 Figure 21.5.4}). It arises from the left ventricle and eventually descends to the abdominal region, where it bifurcates at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra into the two common iliac arteries. The aorta consists of the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the descending aorta, which passes through the diaphragm and a landmark that divides into the superior thoracic and inferior abdominal components. Arteries originating from the aorta ultimately distribute blood to virtually all tissues of the body. At the base of the aorta is the aortic semilunar valve that prevents backflow of blood into the left ventricle while the heart is relaxing. After exiting the heart, the  **ascending aorta** moves in a superior direction for approximately 5 cm and ends at the sternal angle. Following this ascent, it reverses direction, forming a graceful arc to the left, called the  **aortic arch**. The aortic arch descends toward the inferior portions of the body and ends at the level of the intervertebral disk between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae. Beyond this point, the  **descending aorta** continues close to the bodies of the vertebrae and passes through an opening in the diaphragm known as the  **aortic hiatus**. Superior to the diaphragm, the aorta is called the  **thoracic aorta**, and inferior to the diaphragm, it is called the  **abdominal aorta**. The abdominal aorta terminates when it bifurcates into the two common iliac arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra. See {'Figure_21_5_4 Figure 21.5.4} for an illustration of the ascending aorta, the aortic arch, and the initial segment of the descending aorta plus major branches;  summarizes the structures of the aorta.


{image:'Figure_21_5_4}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Aorta | Largest artery in the body, originating from the left ventricle and descending to the abdominal region, where it bifurcates into the common iliac arteries at the level of the fourth lumbar vertebra; arteries originating from the aorta distribute blood to virtually all tissues of the body |
| Ascending aorta | Initial portion of the aorta, rising superiorly from the left ventricle for a distance of approximately 5 cm |
| Aortic arch | Graceful arc to the left that connects the ascending aorta to the descending aorta; ends at the intervertebral disk between the fourth and fifth thoracic vertebrae |
| Descending aorta | Portion of the aorta that continues inferiorly past the end of the aortic arch; subdivided into the thoracic aorta and the abdominal aorta |
| Thoracic aorta | Portion of the descending aorta superior to the aortic hiatus |
| Abdominal aorta | Portion of the aorta inferior to the aortic hiatus and superior to the common iliac arteries |
    

## Coronary Circulation

The first vessels that branch from the ascending aorta are the paired coronary arteries (see {'Figure_21_5_4 Figure 21.5.4}), which arise from two of the three sinuses in the ascending aorta just superior to the aortic semilunar valve. These sinuses contain the aortic baroreceptors and chemoreceptors critical to maintain cardiac function. The left coronary artery arises from the left posterior aortic sinus. The right coronary artery arises from the anterior aortic sinus. Normally, the right posterior aortic sinus does not give rise to a vessel.

The coronary arteries encircle the heart, forming a ring-like structure that divides into the next level of branches that supplies blood to the heart tissues. (Seek additional content for more detail on cardiac circulation.)

## Aortic Arch Branches

There are three major branches of the aortic arch: the brachiocephalic artery, the left common carotid artery, and the left subclavian (literally “under the clavicle”) artery. As you would expect based upon proximity to the heart, each of these vessels is classified as an elastic artery.

The brachiocephalic artery is located only on the right side of the body; there is no corresponding artery on the left. The brachiocephalic artery branches into the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery. The left subclavian and left common carotid arteries arise independently from the aortic arch but otherwise follow a similar pattern and distribution to the corresponding arteries on the right side (see {'Figure_21_5_2 Figure 21.5.2}).

Each  **subclavian artery** supplies blood to the arms, chest, shoulders, back, and central nervous system. It then gives rise to three major branches: the internal thoracic artery, the vertebral artery, and the thyrocervical artery. The  **internal thoracic artery**, or mammary artery, supplies blood to the thymus, the pericardium of the heart, and the anterior chest wall. The  **vertebral artery** passes through the vertebral foramen in the cervical vertebrae and then through the foramen magnum into the cranial cavity to supply blood to the brain and spinal cord. The paired vertebral arteries join together to form the large basilar artery at the base of the medulla oblongata. This is an example of an anastomosis. The subclavian artery also gives rise to the  **thyrocervical artery** that provides blood to the thyroid, the cervical region of the neck, and the upper back and shoulder.

The  **common carotid artery** divides into internal and external carotid arteries. The right common carotid artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery and the left common carotid artery arises directly from the aortic arch. The  **external carotid artery** supplies blood to numerous structures within the face, lower jaw, neck, esophagus, and larynx. These branches include the lingual, facial, occipital, maxillary, and superficial temporal arteries. The  **internal carotid artery** initially forms an expansion known as the carotid sinus, containing the carotid baroreceptors and chemoreceptors. Like their counterparts in the aortic sinuses, the information provided by these receptors is critical to maintaining cardiovascular homeostasis (see {'Figure_21_5_2 Figure 21.5.2}).

The internal carotid arteries along with the vertebral arteries are the two primary suppliers of blood to the human brain. Given the central role and vital importance of the brain to life, it is critical that blood supply to this organ remains uninterrupted. Recall that blood flow to the brain is remarkably constant, with approximately 20 percent of blood flow directed to this organ at any given time. When blood flow is interrupted, even for just a few seconds, a  **transient ischemic attack (TIA)**, or mini-stroke, may occur, resulting in loss of consciousness or temporary loss of neurological function. In some cases, the damage may be permanent. Loss of blood flow for longer periods, typically between 3 and 4 minutes, will likely produce irreversible brain damage or a stroke, also called a  **cerebrovascular accident (CVA)**. The locations of the arteries in the brain not only provide blood flow to the brain tissue but also prevent interruption in the flow of blood. Both the carotid and vertebral arteries branch once they enter the cranial cavity, and some of these branches form a structure known as the  **arterial circle** (or  **circle of Willis**), an anastomosis that is remarkably like a traffic circle that sends off branches (in this case, arterial branches to the brain). As a rule, branches to the anterior portion of the cerebrum are normally fed by the internal carotid arteries; the remainder of the brain receives blood flow from branches associated with the vertebral arteries.

The internal carotid artery continues through the carotid canal of the temporal bone and enters the base of the brain through the carotid foramen where it gives rise to several branches ({'Figure_21_5_5 Figure 21.5.5} and {'Figure_21_5_6 Figure 21.5.6}). One of these branches is the  **anterior cerebral artery** that supplies blood to the frontal lobe of the cerebrum. Another branch, the  **middle cerebral artery**, supplies blood to the temporal and parietal lobes, which are the most common sites of CVAs. The  **ophthalmic artery**, the third major branch, provides blood to the eyes.

The right and left anterior cerebral arteries join together to form an anastomosis called the  **anterior communicating artery**. The initial segments of the anterior cerebral arteries and the anterior communicating artery form the anterior portion of the arterial circle. The posterior portion of the arterial circle is formed by a left and a right  **posterior communicating artery** that branches from the  **posterior cerebral artery**, which arises from the basilar artery. It provides blood to the posterior portion of the cerebrum and brain stem. The  **basilar artery** is an anastomosis that begins at the junction of the two vertebral arteries and sends branches to the cerebellum and brain stem. It flows into the posterior cerebral arteries.  summarizes the aortic arch branches, including the major branches supplying the brain.


{image:'Figure_21_5_5}
        


{image:'Figure_21_5_6}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Brachiocephalic artery | Single vessel located on the right side of the body; the first vessel branching from the aortic arch; gives rise to the right subclavian artery and the right common carotid artery; supplies blood to the head, neck, upper limb, and wall of the thoracic region |
| Subclavian artery | The right subclavian artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery while the left subclavian artery arises from the aortic arch; gives rise to the internal thoracic, vertebral, and thyrocervical arteries; supplies blood to the arms, chest, shoulders, back, and central nervous system |
| Internal thoracic artery | Also called the mammary artery; arises from the subclavian artery; supplies blood to the thymus, pericardium of the heart, and anterior chest wall |
| Vertebral artery | Arises from the subclavian artery and passes through the vertebral foramen through the foramen magnum to the brain; joins with the internal carotid artery to form the arterial circle; supplies blood to the brain and spinal cord |
| Thyrocervical artery | Arises from the subclavian artery; supplies blood to the thyroid, the cervical region, the upper back, and shoulder |
| Common carotid artery | The right common carotid artery arises from the brachiocephalic artery and the left common carotid artery arises from the aortic arch; each gives rise to the external and internal carotid arteries; supplies the respective sides of the head and neck |
| External carotid artery | Arises from the common carotid artery; supplies blood to numerous structures within the face, lower jaw, neck, esophagus, and larynx |
| Internal carotid artery | Arises from the common carotid artery and begins with the carotid sinus; goes through the carotid canal of the temporal bone to the base of the brain; combines with the branches of the vertebral artery, forming the arterial circle; supplies blood to the brain |
| Arterial circle or circle of Willis | An anastomosis located at the base of the brain that ensures continual blood supply; formed from the branches of the internal carotid and vertebral arteries; supplies blood to the brain |
| Anterior cerebral artery | Arises from the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the frontal lobe of the cerebrum |
| Middle cerebral artery | Another branch of the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the temporal and parietal lobes of the cerebrum |
| Ophthalmic artery | Branch of the internal carotid artery; supplies blood to the eyes |
| Anterior communicating artery | An anastomosis of the right and left internal carotid arteries; supplies blood to the brain |
| Posterior communicating artery | Branches of the posterior cerebral artery that form part of the posterior portion of the arterial circle; supplies blood to the brain |
| Posterior cerebral artery | Branch of the basilar artery that forms a portion of the posterior segment of the arterial circle of Willis; supplies blood to the posterior portion of the cerebrum and brain stem |
| Basilar artery | Formed from the fusion of the two vertebral arteries; sends branches to the cerebellum, brain stem, and the posterior cerebral arteries; the main blood supply to the brain stem |
    

## Thoracic Aorta and Major Branches

The thoracic aorta begins at the level of vertebra T5 and continues through to the diaphragm at the level of T12, initially traveling within the mediastinum to the left of the vertebral column. As it passes through the thoracic region, the thoracic aorta gives rise to several branches, which are collectively referred to as visceral branches and parietal branches ({'Figure_21_5_7 Figure 21.5.7}). Those branches that supply blood primarily to visceral organs are known as the  **visceral branches** and include the bronchial arteries, pericardial arteries, esophageal arteries, and the mediastinal arteries, each named after the tissues it supplies. Each  **bronchial artery** (typically two on the left and one on the right) supplies systemic blood to the lungs and visceral pleura, in addition to the blood pumped to the lungs for oxygenation via the pulmonary circuit. The bronchial arteries follow the same path as the respiratory branches, beginning with the bronchi and ending with the bronchioles. There is considerable, but not total, intermingling of the systemic and pulmonary blood at anastomoses in the smaller branches of the lungs. This may sound incongruous—that is, the mixing of systemic arterial blood high in oxygen with the pulmonary arterial blood lower in oxygen—but the systemic vessels also deliver nutrients to the lung tissue just as they do elsewhere in the body. The mixed blood drains into typical pulmonary veins, whereas the bronchial artery branches remain separate and drain into bronchial veins described later. Each  **pericardial artery** supplies blood to the pericardium, the  **esophageal artery** provides blood to the esophagus, and the  **mediastinal artery** provides blood to the mediastinum. The remaining thoracic aorta branches are collectively referred to as  **parietal branches** or somatic branches, and include the intercostal and superior phrenic arteries. Each  **intercostal artery** provides blood to the muscles of the thoracic cavity and vertebral column. The  **superior phrenic artery** provides blood to the superior surface of the diaphragm.  lists the arteries of the thoracic region.


{image:'Figure_21_5_7}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Visceral branches | A group of arterial branches of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the viscera (i.e., organs) of the thorax |
| Bronchial artery | Systemic branch from the aorta that provides oxygenated blood to the lungs; this blood supply is in addition to the pulmonary circuit that brings blood for oxygenation |
| Pericardial artery | Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the pericardium |
| Esophageal artery | Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the esophagus |
| Mediastinal artery | Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the mediastinum |
| Parietal branches | Also called somatic branches, a group of arterial branches of the thoracic aorta; include those that supply blood to the thoracic wall, vertebral column, and the superior surface of the diaphragm |
| Intercostal artery | Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the muscles of the thoracic cavity and vertebral column |
| Superior phrenic artery | Branch of the thoracic aorta; supplies blood to the superior surface of the diaphragm |
    

## Abdominal Aorta and Major Branches

After crossing through the diaphragm at the aortic hiatus, the thoracic aorta is called the abdominal aorta (see {'Figure_21_5_7 Figure 21.5.7}). This vessel remains to the left of the vertebral column and is embedded in adipose tissue behind the peritoneal cavity. It formally ends at approximately the level of vertebra L4, where it bifurcates to form the common iliac arteries. Before this division, the abdominal aorta gives rise to several important branches. A single  **celiac trunk** (artery) emerges and divides into the  **left gastric artery** to supply blood to the stomach and esophagus, the  **splenic artery** to supply blood to the spleen, and the  **common hepatic artery**, which in turn gives rise to the  **hepatic artery proper** to supply blood to the liver, the  **right gastric artery** to supply blood to the stomach, the  **cystic artery** to supply blood to the gall bladder, and several branches, one to supply blood to the duodenum and another to supply blood to the pancreas. Two additional single vessels arise from the abdominal aorta. These are the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries. The  **superior mesenteric artery** arises approximately 2.5 cm after the celiac trunk and branches into several major vessels that supply blood to the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, and ileum), the pancreas, and a majority of the large intestine. The  **inferior mesenteric artery** supplies blood to the distal segment of the large intestine, including the rectum. It arises approximately 5 cm superior to the common iliac arteries.

In addition to these single branches, the abdominal aorta gives rise to several significant paired arteries along the way. These include the inferior phrenic arteries, the adrenal arteries, the renal arteries, the gonadal arteries, and the lumbar arteries. Each  **inferior phrenic artery** is a counterpart of a superior phrenic artery and supplies blood to the inferior surface of the diaphragm. The  **adrenal artery** supplies blood to the adrenal (suprarenal) glands and arises near the superior mesenteric artery. Each  **renal artery** branches approximately 2.5 cm inferior to the superior mesenteric arteries and supplies a kidney. The right renal artery is longer than the left since the aorta lies to the left of the vertebral column and the vessel must travel a greater distance to reach its target. Renal arteries branch repeatedly to supply blood to the kidneys. Each  **gonadal artery** supplies blood to the gonads, or reproductive organs, and is also described as either an ovarian artery or a testicular artery (internal spermatic), depending upon the sex of the individual. An  **ovarian artery** supplies blood to an ovary, uterine (Fallopian) tube, and the uterus, and is located within the suspensory ligament of the uterus. It is considerably shorter than a  **testicular artery**, which ultimately travels outside the body cavity to the testes, forming one component of the spermatic cord. The gonadal arteries arise inferior to the renal arteries and are generally retroperitoneal. The ovarian artery continues to the uterus where it forms an anastomosis with the uterine artery that supplies blood to the uterus. Both the uterine arteries and vaginal arteries, which distribute blood to the vagina, are branches of the internal iliac artery. The four paired  **lumbar arteries** are the counterparts of the intercostal arteries and supply blood to the lumbar region, the abdominal wall, and the spinal cord. In some instances, a fifth pair of lumbar arteries emerges from the median sacral artery.

The aorta divides at approximately the level of vertebra L4 into a left and a right  **common iliac artery** but continues as a small vessel, the  **median sacral artery**, into the sacrum. The common iliac arteries provide blood to the pelvic region and ultimately to the lower limbs. They split into external and internal iliac arteries approximately at the level of the lumbar-sacral articulation. Each  **internal iliac artery** sends branches to the urinary bladder, the walls of the pelvis, the external genitalia, and the medial portion of the femoral region. In females, they also provide blood to the uterus and vagina. The much larger  **external iliac artery** supplies blood to each of the lower limbs. {'Figure_21_5_8 Figure 21.5.8} shows the distribution of the major branches of the aorta into the thoracic and abdominal regions. {'Figure_21_5_9 Figure 21.5.9} shows the distribution of the major branches of the common iliac arteries.  summarizes the major branches of the abdominal aorta.


{image:'Figure_21_5_8}
        


{image:'Figure_21_5_9}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Celiac trunk | Also called the celiac artery; a major branch of the abdominal aorta; gives rise to the left gastric artery, the splenic artery, and the common hepatic artery that forms the hepatic artery to the liver, the right gastric artery to the stomach, and the cystic artery to the gall bladder |
| Left gastric artery | Branch of the celiac trunk; supplies blood to the stomach |
| Splenic artery | Branch of the celiac trunk; supplies blood to the spleen |
| Common hepatic artery | Branch of the celiac trunk that forms the hepatic artery, the right gastric artery, and the cystic artery |
| Hepatic artery proper | Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies systemic blood to the liver |
| Right gastric artery | Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies blood to the stomach |
| Cystic artery | Branch of the common hepatic artery; supplies blood to the gall bladder |
| Superior mesenteric artery | Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, and ileum), the pancreas, and a majority of the large intestine |
| Inferior mesenteric artery | Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the distal segment of the large intestine and rectum |
| Inferior phrenic arteries | Branches of the abdominal aorta; supply blood to the inferior surface of the diaphragm |
| Adrenal artery | Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the adrenal (suprarenal) glands |
| Renal artery | Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies each kidney |
| Gonadal artery | Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to the gonads or reproductive organs; also described as ovarian arteries or testicular arteries, depending upon the sex of the individual |
| Ovarian artery | Branch of the abdominal aorta; supplies blood to ovary, uterine (Fallopian) tube, and uterus |
| Testicular artery | Branch of the abdominal aorta; ultimately travels outside the body cavity to the testes and forms one component of the spermatic cord |
| Lumbar arteries | Branches of the abdominal aorta; supply blood to the lumbar region, the abdominal wall, and spinal cord |
| Common iliac artery | Branch of the aorta that leads to the internal and external iliac arteries |
| Median sacral artery | Continuation of the aorta into the sacrum |
| Internal iliac artery | Branch from the common iliac arteries; supplies blood to the urinary bladder, walls of the pelvis, external genitalia, and the medial portion of the femoral region; in females, also provides blood to the uterus and vagina |
| External iliac artery | Branch of the common iliac artery that leaves the body cavity and becomes a femoral artery; supplies blood to the lower limbs |
    
