index: hide
name: Overview of Systemic Veins

Systemic veins return blood to the right atrium. Since the blood has already passed through the systemic capillaries, it will be relatively low in oxygen concentration. In many cases, there will be veins draining organs and regions of the body with the same name as the arteries that supplied these regions and the two often parallel one another. This is often described as a “complementary” pattern. However, there is a great deal more variability in the venous circulation than normally occurs in the arteries. For the sake of brevity and clarity, this text will discuss only the most commonly encountered patterns. However, keep this variation in mind when you move from the classroom to clinical practice.

In both the neck and limb regions, there are often both superficial and deeper levels of veins. The deeper veins generally correspond to the complementary arteries. The superficial veins do not normally have direct arterial counterparts, but in addition to returning blood, they also make contributions to the maintenance of body temperature. When the ambient temperature is warm, more blood is diverted to the superficial veins where heat can be more easily dissipated to the environment. In colder weather, there is more constriction of the superficial veins and blood is diverted deeper where the body can retain more of the heat.

The “Voyage of Discovery” analogy and stick drawings mentioned earlier remain valid techniques for the study of systemic veins, but veins present a more difficult challenge because there are numerous anastomoses and multiple branches. It is like following a river with many tributaries and channels, several of which interconnect. Tracing blood flow through arteries follows the current in the direction of blood flow, so that we move from the heart through the large arteries and into the smaller arteries to the capillaries. From the capillaries, we move into the smallest veins and follow the direction of blood flow into larger veins and back to the heart. {'Figure_21_5_14 Figure 21.5.14} outlines the path of the major systemic veins.


{image:'Figure_21_5_14}
        

The right atrium receives all of the systemic venous return. Most of the blood flows into either the superior vena cava or inferior vena cava. If you draw an imaginary line at the level of the diaphragm, systemic venous circulation from above that line will generally flow into the superior vena cava; this includes blood from the head, neck, chest, shoulders, and upper limbs. The exception to this is that most venous blood flow from the coronary veins flows directly into the coronary sinus and from there directly into the right atrium. Beneath the diaphragm, systemic venous flow enters the inferior vena cava, that is, blood from the abdominal and pelvic regions and the lower limbs.

## The Superior Vena Cava

The  **superior vena cava** drains most of the body superior to the diaphragm ({'Figure_21_5_15 Figure 21.5.15}). On both the left and right sides, the  **subclavian vein** forms when the axillary vein passes through the body wall from the axillary region. It fuses with the external and internal jugular veins from the head and neck to form the  **brachiocephalic vein**. Each  **vertebral vein** also flows into the brachiocephalic vein close to this fusion. These veins arise from the base of the brain and the cervical region of the spinal cord, and flow largely through the intervertebral foramina in the cervical vertebrae. They are the counterparts of the vertebral arteries. Each  **internal thoracic vein**, also known as an internal mammary vein, drains the anterior surface of the chest wall and flows into the brachiocephalic vein.

The remainder of the blood supply from the thorax drains into the azygos vein. Each  **intercostal vein** drains muscles of the thoracic wall, each  **esophageal vein** delivers blood from the inferior portions of the esophagus, each  **bronchial vein** drains the systemic circulation from the lungs, and several smaller veins drain the mediastinal region. Bronchial veins carry approximately 13 percent of the blood that flows into the bronchial arteries; the remainder intermingles with the pulmonary circulation and returns to the heart via the pulmonary veins. These veins flow into the  **azygos vein**, and with the smaller  **hemiazygos vein** (hemi- = “half”) on the left of the vertebral column, drain blood from the thoracic region. The hemiazygos vein does not drain directly into the superior vena cava but enters the brachiocephalic vein via the superior intercostal vein.

The azygos vein passes through the diaphragm from the thoracic cavity on the right side of the vertebral column and begins in the lumbar region of the thoracic cavity. It flows into the superior vena cava at approximately the level of T2, making a significant contribution to the flow of blood. It combines with the two large left and right brachiocephalic veins to form the superior vena cava.

 summarizes the veins of the thoracic region that flow into the superior vena cava.


{image:'Figure_21_5_15}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Superior vena cava | Large systemic vein; drains blood from most areas superior to the diaphragm; empties into the right atrium |
| Subclavian vein | Located deep in the thoracic cavity; formed by the axillary vein as it enters the thoracic cavity from the axillary region; drains the axillary and smaller local veins near the scapular region and leads to the brachiocephalic vein |
| Brachiocephalic veins | Pair of veins that form from a fusion of the external and internal jugular veins and the subclavian vein; subclavian, external and internal jugulars, vertebral, and internal thoracic veins flow into it; drain the upper thoracic region and lead to the superior vena cava |
| Vertebral vein | Arises from the base of the brain and the cervical region of the spinal cord; passes through the intervertebral foramina in the cervical vertebrae; drains smaller veins from the cranium, spinal cord, and vertebrae, and leads to the brachiocephalic vein; counterpart of the vertebral artery |
| Internal thoracic veins | Also called internal mammary veins; drain the anterior surface of the chest wall and lead to the brachiocephalic vein |
| Intercostal vein | Drains the muscles of the thoracic wall and leads to the azygos vein |
| Esophageal vein | Drains the inferior portions of the esophagus and leads to the azygos vein |
| Bronchial vein | Drains the systemic circulation from the lungs and leads to the azygos vein |
| Azygos vein | Originates in the lumbar region and passes through the diaphragm into the thoracic cavity on the right side of the vertebral column; drains blood from the intercostal veins, esophageal veins, bronchial veins, and other veins draining the mediastinal region, and leads to the superior vena cava |
| Hemiazygos vein | Smaller vein complementary to the azygos vein; drains the esophageal veins from the esophagus and the left intercostal veins, and leads to the brachiocephalic vein via the superior intercostal vein |
    

## Veins of the Head and Neck

Blood from the brain and the superficial facial vein flow into each  **internal jugular vein** ({'Figure_21_5_16 Figure 21.5.16}). Blood from the more superficial portions of the head, scalp, and cranial regions, including the  **temporal vein** and  **maxillary vein**, flow into each  **external jugular vein**. Although the external and internal jugular veins are separate vessels, there are anastomoses between them close to the thoracic region. Blood from the external jugular vein empties into the subclavian vein.  summarizes the major veins of the head and neck.


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Internal jugular vein | Parallel to the common carotid artery, which is more or less its counterpart, and passes through the jugular foramen and canal; primarily drains blood from the brain, receives the superficial facial vein, and empties into the subclavian vein |
| Temporal vein | Drains blood from the temporal region and flows into the external jugular vein |
| Maxillary vein | Drains blood from the maxillary region and flows into the external jugular vein |
| External jugular vein | Drains blood from the more superficial portions of the head, scalp, and cranial regions, and leads to the subclavian vein |
    

## Venous Drainage of the Brain

Circulation to the brain is both critical and complex (see {'Figure_21_5_16 Figure 21.5.16}). Many smaller veins of the brain stem and the superficial veins of the cerebrum lead to larger vessels referred to as intracranial sinuses. These include the superior and inferior sagittal sinuses, straight sinus, cavernous sinuses, left and right sinuses, the petrosal sinuses, and the occipital sinuses. Ultimately, sinuses will lead back to either the inferior jugular vein or vertebral vein.

Most of the veins on the superior surface of the cerebrum flow into the largest of the sinuses, the  **superior sagittal sinus**. It is located midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater within the falx cerebri and, at first glance in images or models, can be mistaken for the subarachnoid space. Most reabsorption of cerebrospinal fluid occurs via the chorionic villi (arachnoid granulations) into the superior sagittal sinus. Blood from most of the smaller vessels originating from the inferior cerebral veins flows into the  **great cerebral vein** and into the  **straight sinus**. Other cerebral veins and those from the eye socket flow into the  **cavernous sinus**, which flows into the  **petrosal sinus** and then into the internal jugular vein. The  **occipital sinus**, sagittal sinus, and straight sinuses all flow into the left and right transverse sinuses near the lambdoid suture. The  **transverse sinuses** in turn flow into the  **sigmoid sinuses** that pass through the jugular foramen and into the internal jugular vein. The internal jugular vein flows parallel to the common carotid artery and is more or less its counterpart. It empties into the brachiocephalic vein. The veins draining the cervical vertebrae and the posterior surface of the skull, including some blood from the occipital sinus, flow into the vertebral veins. These parallel the vertebral arteries and travel through the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae. The vertebral veins also flow into the brachiocephalic veins.  summarizes the major veins of the brain.


{image:'Figure_21_5_16}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Superior sagittal sinus | Enlarged vein located midsagittally between the meningeal and periosteal layers of the dura mater within the falx cerebri; receives most of the blood drained from the superior surface of the cerebrum and leads to the inferior jugular vein and the vertebral vein |
| Great cerebral vein | Receives most of the smaller vessels from the inferior cerebral veins and leads to the straight sinus |
| Straight sinus | Enlarged vein that drains blood from the brain; receives most of the blood from the great cerebral vein and leads to the left or right transverse sinus |
| Cavernous sinus | Enlarged vein that receives blood from most of the other cerebral veins and the eye socket, and leads to the petrosal sinus |
| Petrosal sinus | Enlarged vein that receives blood from the cavernous sinus and leads into the internal jugular veins |
| Occipital sinus | Enlarged vein that drains the occipital region near the falx cerebelli and leads to the left and right transverse sinuses, and also the vertebral veins |
| Transverse sinuses | Pair of enlarged veins near the lambdoid suture that drains the occipital, sagittal, and straight sinuses, and leads to the sigmoid sinuses |
| Sigmoid sinuses | Enlarged vein that receives blood from the transverse sinuses and leads through the jugular foramen to the internal jugular vein |
    

## Veins Draining the Upper Limbs

The  **digital veins** in the fingers come together in the hand to form the  **palmar venous arches** ({'Figure_21_5_17 Figure 21.5.17}). From here, the veins come together to form the radial vein, the ulnar vein, and the median antebrachial vein. The  **radial vein** and the  **ulnar vein** parallel the bones of the forearm and join together at the antebrachium to form the  **brachial vein**, a deep vein that flows into the axillary vein in the brachium.

The  **median antebrachial vein** parallels the ulnar vein, is more medial in location, and joins the  **basilic vein** in the forearm. As the basilic vein reaches the antecubital region, it gives off a branch called the  **median cubital vein** that crosses at an angle to join the cephalic vein. The median cubital vein is the most common site for drawing venous blood in humans. The basilic vein continues through the arm medially and superficially to the axillary vein.

The  **cephalic vein** begins in the antebrachium and drains blood from the superficial surface of the arm into the axillary vein. It is extremely superficial and easily seen along the surface of the biceps brachii muscle in individuals with good muscle tone and in those without excessive subcutaneous adipose tissue in the arms.

The  **subscapular vein** drains blood from the subscapular region and joins the cephalic vein to form the  **axillary vein**. As it passes through the body wall and enters the thorax, the axillary vein becomes the subclavian vein.

Many of the larger veins of the thoracic and abdominal region and upper limb are further represented in the flow chart in {'Figure_21_5_18 Figure 21.5.18}.  summarizes the veins of the upper limbs.


{image:'Figure_21_5_17}
        


{image:'Figure_21_5_18}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Digital veins | Drain the digits and lead to the palmar arches of the hand and dorsal venous arch of the foot |
| Palmar venous arches | Drain the hand and digits, and lead to the radial vein, ulnar veins, and the median antebrachial vein |
| Radial vein | Vein that parallels the radius and radial artery; arises from the palmar venous arches and leads to the brachial vein |
| Ulnar vein | Vein that parallels the ulna and ulnar artery; arises from the palmar venous arches and leads to the brachial vein |
| Brachial vein | Deeper vein of the arm that forms from the radial and ulnar veins in the lower arm; leads to the axillary vein |
| Median antebrachial vein | Vein that parallels the ulnar vein but is more medial in location; intertwines with the palmar venous arches; leads to the basilic vein |
| Basilic vein | Superficial vein of the arm that arises from the median antebrachial vein, intersects with the median cubital vein, parallels the ulnar vein, and continues into the upper arm; along with the brachial vein, it leads to the axillary vein |
| Median cubital vein | Superficial vessel located in the antecubital region that links the cephalic vein to the basilic vein in the form of a v; a frequent site from which to draw blood |
| Cephalic vein | Superficial vessel in the upper arm; leads to the axillary vein |
| Subscapular vein | Drains blood from the subscapular region and leads to the axillary vein |
| Axillary vein | The major vein in the axillary region; drains the upper limb and becomes the subclavian vein |
    

## The Inferior Vena Cava

Other than the small amount of blood drained by the azygos and hemiazygos veins, most of the blood inferior to the diaphragm drains into the inferior vena cava before it is returned to the heart (see {'Figure_21_5_15 Figure 21.5.15}). Lying just beneath the parietal peritoneum in the abdominal cavity, the  **inferior vena cava** parallels the abdominal aorta, where it can receive blood from abdominal veins. The lumbar portions of the abdominal wall and spinal cord are drained by a series of  **lumbar veins**, usually four on each side. The ascending lumbar veins drain into either the azygos vein on the right or the hemiazygos vein on the left, and return to the superior vena cava. The remaining lumbar veins drain directly into the inferior vena cava.

Blood supply from the kidneys flows into each  **renal vein**, normally the largest veins entering the inferior vena cava. A number of other, smaller veins empty into the left renal vein. Each  **adrenal vein** drains the adrenal or suprarenal glands located immediately superior to the kidneys. The right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava directly, whereas the left adrenal vein enters the left renal vein.

From the male reproductive organs, each  **testicular vein** flows from the scrotum, forming a portion of the spermatic cord. Each  **ovarian vein** drains an ovary in females. Each of these veins is generically called a  **gonadal vein**. The right gonadal vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava, and the left gonadal vein empties into the left renal vein.

Each side of the diaphragm drains into a  **phrenic vein**; the right phrenic vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava, whereas the left phrenic vein empties into the left renal vein. Blood supply from the liver drains into each  **hepatic vein** and directly into the inferior vena cava. Since the inferior vena cava lies primarily to the right of the vertebral column and aorta, the left renal vein is longer, as are the left phrenic, adrenal, and gonadal veins. The longer length of the left renal vein makes the left kidney the primary target of surgeons removing this organ for donation. {'Figure_21_5_19 Figure 21.5.19} provides a flow chart of the veins flowing into the inferior vena cava.  summarizes the major veins of the abdominal region.


{image:'Figure_21_5_19}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Inferior vena cava | Large systemic vein that drains blood from areas largely inferior to the diaphragm; empties into the right atrium |
| Lumbar veins | Series of veins that drain the lumbar portion of the abdominal wall and spinal cord; the ascending lumbar veins drain into the azygos vein on the right or the hemiazygos vein on the left; the remaining lumbar veins drain directly into the inferior vena cava |
| Renal vein | Largest vein entering the inferior vena cava; drains the kidneys and flows into the inferior vena cava |
| Adrenal vein | Drains the adrenal or suprarenal; the right adrenal vein enters the inferior vena cava directly and the left adrenal vein enters the left renal vein |
| Testicular vein | Drains the testes and forms part of the spermatic cord; the right testicular vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava and the left testicular vein empties into the left renal vein |
| Ovarian vein | Drains the ovary; the right ovarian vein empties directly into the inferior vena cava and the left ovarian vein empties into the left renal vein |
| Gonadal vein | Generic term for a vein draining a reproductive organ; may be either an ovarian vein or a testicular vein, depending on the sex of the individual |
| Phrenic vein | Drains the diaphragm; the right phrenic vein flows into the inferior vena cava and the left phrenic vein empties into the left renal vein |
| Hepatic vein | Drains systemic blood from the liver and flows into the inferior vena cava |
    

## Veins Draining the Lower Limbs

The superior surface of the foot drains into the digital veins, and the inferior surface drains into the  **plantar veins**, which flow into a complex series of anastomoses in the feet and ankles, including the  **dorsal venous arch** and the  **plantar venous arch** ({'Figure_21_5_20 Figure 21.5.20}). From the dorsal venous arch, blood supply drains into the anterior and posterior tibial veins. The  **anterior tibial vein** drains the area near the tibialis anterior muscle and combines with the posterior tibial vein and the fibular vein to form the popliteal vein. The  **posterior tibial vein** drains the posterior surface of the tibia and joins the popliteal vein. The  **fibular vein** drains the muscles and integument in proximity to the fibula and also joins the popliteal vein. The  **small saphenous vein** located on the lateral surface of the leg drains blood from the superficial regions of the lower leg and foot, and flows into to the  **popliteal vein**. As the popliteal vein passes behind the knee in the popliteal region, it becomes the femoral vein. It is palpable in patients without excessive adipose tissue.

Close to the body wall, the great saphenous vein, the deep femoral vein, and the femoral circumflex vein drain into the femoral vein. The  **great saphenous vein** is a prominent surface vessel located on the medial surface of the leg and thigh that collects blood from the superficial portions of these areas. The  **deep femoral vein**, as the name suggests, drains blood from the deeper portions of the thigh. The  **femoral circumflex vein** forms a loop around the femur just inferior to the trochanters and drains blood from the areas in proximity to the head and neck of the femur.

As the  **femoral vein** penetrates the body wall from the femoral portion of the upper limb, it becomes the  **external iliac vein**, a large vein that drains blood from the leg to the common iliac vein. The pelvic organs and integument drain into the  **internal iliac vein**, which forms from several smaller veins in the region, including the umbilical veins that run on either side of the bladder. The external and internal iliac veins combine near the inferior portion of the sacroiliac joint to form the common iliac vein. In addition to blood supply from the external and internal iliac veins, the  **middle sacral vein** drains the sacral region into the  **common iliac vein**. Similar to the common iliac arteries, the common iliac veins come together at the level of L5 to form the inferior vena cava.

{'Figure_21_5_21 Figure 21.5.21} is a flow chart of veins flowing into the lower limb.  summarizes the major veins of the lower limbs.


{image:'Figure_21_5_20}
        


{image:'Figure_21_5_21}
        


****

| Vessel | Description |
|:-:|:-:|
| Plantar veins | Drain the foot and flow into the plantar venous arch |
| Dorsal venous arch | Drains blood from digital veins and vessels on the superior surface of the foot |
| Plantar venous arch | Formed from the plantar veins; flows into the anterior and posterior tibial veins through anastomoses |
| Anterior tibial vein | Formed from the dorsal venous arch; drains the area near the tibialis anterior muscle and flows into the popliteal vein |
| Posterior tibial vein | Formed from the dorsal venous arch; drains the area near the posterior surface of the tibia and flows into the popliteal vein |
| Fibular vein | Drains the muscles and integument near the fibula and flows into the popliteal vein |
| Small saphenous vein | Located on the lateral surface of the leg; drains blood from the superficial regions of the lower leg and foot, and flows into the popliteal vein |
| Popliteal vein | Drains the region behind the knee and forms from the fusion of the fibular, anterior, and posterior tibial veins; flows into the femoral vein |
| Great saphenous vein | Prominent surface vessel located on the medial surface of the leg and thigh; drains the superficial portions of these areas and flows into the femoral vein |
| Deep femoral vein | Drains blood from the deeper portions of the thigh and flows into the femoral vein |
| Femoral circumflex vein | Forms a loop around the femur just inferior to the trochanters; drains blood from the areas around the head and neck of the femur; flows into the femoral vein |
| Femoral vein | Drains the upper leg; receives blood from the great saphenous vein, the deep femoral vein, and the femoral circumflex vein; becomes the external iliac vein when it crosses the body wall |
| External iliac vein | Formed when the femoral vein passes into the body cavity; drains the legs and flows into the common iliac vein |
| Internal iliac vein | Drains the pelvic organs and integument; formed from several smaller veins in the region; flows into the common iliac vein |
| Middle sacral vein | Drains the sacral region and flows into the left common iliac vein |
| Common iliac vein | Flows into the inferior vena cava at the level of L5; the left common iliac vein drains the sacral region; formed from the union of the external and internal iliac veins near the inferior portion of the sacroiliac joint |
    
