index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.3.2.3.2
title: 11.3.2.3.2 - Changes in evaporation, evaporation minus precipitation, runoff, soil moisture, relative humidity and specific humidity

Because the variability of the atmospheric moisture storage is negligible, global mean increases in evaporation are required to balance increases in precipitation in response to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} ({cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2007a}; {cite.11.'Trenberth_et_al_2007}; {cite.11.'Bates_et_al_2008}; Lu and M. Cai, 2009). The global atmospheric water content is constrained by the {Glossary.*Clausius_Clapeyron_equation_relationship Clausius–Clapeyron} equation to increase at around 7% K–1; however, both the global precipitation and evaporation in global warming simulations increase at 1 to 3% K–1 ({cite.11.'Lambert_and_Webb_2008}; Lu and M.Cai, 2009).

Changes in {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration} over land are influenced not only by the response to RF, but also by the vegetation response to elevated {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} concentrations. Physiological effects of CO2 may involve both the stomatal response, which acts to restrict transpiration ({cite.11.'Field_et_al_1995}; {cite.11.'Hungate_et_al_2002}; {cite.11.'Cao_et_al_2009}, 2010; {cite.11.'Lammertsma_et_al_2011}), and an increase in plant growth and leaf area, which acts to increase evapotranspiration (El Nadi, 1974; {cite.11.'Bounoua_et_al_2010}). Simulation of the latter process requires the inclusion of vegetation models that allow spatial and temporal variability in the amount of active {Glossary.*Biomass biomass}, either by changes in the phenological cycle or changes in the {Glossary.*Biome biome} structure.

In response to GHG forcing, dry land areas tend to show a reduction of evaporation and often precipitation, accompanied by a drying of the soil and an increase of {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}, in response to decreases in latent heat fluxes from the surface (e.g., {cite.11.'Fischer_et_al_2007}; {cite.11.'Seneviratne_et_al_2010}). {cite.11.'Jung_et_al_2010 Jung et al. (2010)} use a mixture of observations and models to illustrate a recent global mean decline in land surface evaporation due to soil-moisture limitations. Accompanying precipitation effects are more subtle, as there are significant {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} and large geographical variations regarding the soil-moisture precipitation {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} ({cite.11.'Hohenegger_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'Taylor_et_al_2011}). {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} ({cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2007b Meehl et al. (2007b)} of annual mean {Glossary.*Soil_moisture soil moisture} changes for the 21st century showed a tendency for decreases in the subtropics, southern South America and the Mediterranean {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, and increases in limited areas of east Africa and central Asia. Changes seen in other regions were mostly not consistent or statistically significant.

AR4 projections of 21st century {Glossary.*Runoff runoff} changes ({cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}) showed consistency in sign among models indicating annual mean reductions in southern Europe and increases in Southeast Asia and at high northern latitudes. Projected changes in global mean runoff associated with the physiological effects of doubled CO2 concentrations show increases of 6 to 8% relative to pre-industrial levels, an increase that is comparable to that simulated in response to RF changes (11% ± 6%) ({cite.11.'Betts_et_al_2007}; {cite.11.'Cao_et_al_2010}). {cite.11.'Gosling_et_al_2011 Gosling et al. (2011)} assess the projected impacts of climate change on river runoff from global and basin-scale hydrological models obtaining increased runoff with global warming in the Liard (Canada), Rio Grande (Brazil) and Xiangxi (China) basins and decrease for the Okavango (southwest Africa).

Consideration of hydrological {Glossary.*Drought drought} conditions employs a range of different dryness indicators, such as soil moisture or other drought indices that integrate precipitation and evaporation effects ({cite.11.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}). There are large uncertainties in regional drought projections ({cite.11.'Burke_and_Brown_2008}), and very few studies have addressed the near-term future ({cite.11.'Sheffield_and_Wood_2008}; {cite.11.'Dai_2011}). In order to provide an indication of future changes of water availability, {'Figure_11_13 Figure 11.13}b presents zonal mean changes in precipitation minus evaporation (P – E) from CMIP5. As in the case of precipitation ({'Figure_11_13 Figure 11.13}a), the uncertainty is dominated by model differences as opposed to natural variability (compare blue versus grey shading). The results are consistent with the wet-get-wetter and dry-get-drier pattern (e.g., Held and Soden 2006): In the high latitudes and the tropics, most of the models project zonal-mean increases in P – E, which over land would need to be compensated by increases in runoff (see next paragraph). In contrast, zonal mean projected changes in the subtropics are negative, indicating decreases in water availability. Although this pattern is evident in most or all of the models, and although several studies project drought increases in the near term future ({cite.11.'Sheffield_and_Wood_2008}; {cite.11.'Dai_2011}), the assessment is debated in the literature based on discrepancies in the recent past and due to natural variability ({cite.11.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'Sheffield_et_al_2012}).

The global distribution of the 2016–2035 changes in annual mean evaporation, evaporation minus precipitation (E – P), surface runoff, soil moisture, {Glossary.*Relative_humidity relative humidity} and surface-level {Glossary.*Specific_humidity specific humidity} from the CMIP5 multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} under RCP4.5 are shown in {'Figure_11_14 Figure 11.14}. Changes in evaporation over land (Figure11.14a), are mostly positive with the largest values at northern high latitudes, in agreement with projected temperature increases ({'Figure_11_10 Figure 11.10}). Over the oceans, evaporation is also projected to increase in most regions. Projected changes are larger than the estimated standard deviation of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} only at high latitudes and over the tropical oceans. Decreases in evaporation over land (i.e., Australia, southern Africa, northeastern South America and Mexico) and oceans are smaller than the estimated standard deviation of internal variability; the only exception is the western

{image:'Figure_11_14}

North Atlantic, although the model agreement is low in that region. Projected changes in (E – P) over land ({'Figure_11_14 Figure 11.14}b) are generally consistent with the zonal mean changes shown in {'Figure_11_13 Figure 11.13}b. In the high northern latitudes and the tropics, (E – P) changes are mostly negative as dominated by precipitation increases ({'Figure_11_12 Figure 11.12}), while in the subtropics several areas exhibit increases in (E – P), in particular in Europe, western Australia and central-western USA. However, in most locations changes are smaller than internal variability.

Annual mean shallow soil moisture ({'Figure_11_14 Figure 11.14}d) shows decreases in most subtropical regions (except La Plata basin in South America) and in central Europe, and increases in northern mid-to-high latitudes. Projected changes are larger than the estimated internal variability only in southern Africa, the Amazon region and Europe. Projected changes in runoff ({'Figure_11_14 Figure 11.14}c) show decreases in northern Africa, western Australia, southern Europe and southwestern USA and increases larger than the internal variability in northwestern Africa, southern Arabia and southeastern South America associated to the projected changes in precipitation ({'Figure_11_12 Figure 11.12}). Owing to the simplified hydrological models in many CMIP5 {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}, the projections of soil moisture and runoff have large model uncertainties.

Changes in near-surface specific humidity are positive, with the largest values at northern high latitudes when expressed in percentage terms ({'Figure_11_14 Figure 11.14}e). This is consistent with the projected increases in temperature when assuming constant relative humidity. These changes are larger than the estimated standard deviation of internal variability almost everywhere: the only exceptions are oceanic regions such as the northern North Atlantic and around Antarctica. In comparison, absolute changes in near-surface relative humidity ({'Figure_11_14 Figure 11.14}f) are much smaller, on the order of a few percent, with general decreases over most land areas, and small increases over the oceans. Significant decreases relative to natural variability are projected in the Amazonia, southern Africa and Europe, although the model agreement in these regions is low.

Over the next few decades projected increases in near-surface specific humidity are very likely, and projected increases in evaporation are likely in many land regions. There is low confidence in projected changes in soil moisture and surface runoff.
