index: hide
name: Muscles of the Thigh

What would happen if the pelvic girdle, which attaches the lower limbs to the torso, were capable of the same range of motion as the pectoral girdle? For one thing, walking would expend more energy if the heads of the femurs were not secured in the acetabula of the pelvis. The body’s center of gravity is in the area of the pelvis. If the center of gravity were not to remain fixed, standing up would be difficult as well. Therefore, what the leg muscles lack in range of motion and versatility, they make up for in size and power, facilitating the body’s stabilization, posture, and movement.

## Gluteal Region Muscles That Move the Femur

Most muscles that insert on the femur (the thigh bone) and move it, originate on the pelvic girdle. The  **psoas major** and  **iliacus** make up the  **iliopsoas group**. Some of the largest and most powerful muscles in the body are the gluteal muscles or  **gluteal group**. The  **gluteus maximus** is the largest; deep to the gluteus maximus is the  **gluteus medius**, and deep to the gluteus medius is the  **gluteus minimus**, the smallest of the trio ({'Figure_11_6_1 Figure 11.6.1} and {'Figure_11_6_2 Figure 11.6.2}).


{image:'Figure_11_6_1}
        


{image:'Figure_11_6_2}
        

The  **tensor fascia latae** is a thick, squarish muscle in the superior aspect of the lateral thigh. It acts as a synergist of the gluteus medius and iliopsoas in flexing and abducting the thigh. It also helps stabilize the lateral aspect of the knee by pulling on the  **iliotibial tract** (band), making it taut. Deep to the gluteus maximus, the  **piriformis**,  **obturator internus**, **obturator externus**,  **superior gemellus**,  **inferior gemellus**, and  **quadratus femoris**laterally rotate the femur at the hip.

The  **adductor longus**,  **adductor brevis**, and  **adductor magnus** can both medially and laterally rotate the thigh depending on the placement of the foot. The adductor longus flexes the thigh, whereas the adductor magnus extends it. The  **pectineus** adducts and flexes the femur at the hip as well. The pectineus is located in the  **femoral triangle**, which is formed at the junction between the hip and the leg and also includes the femoral nerve, the femoral artery, the femoral vein, and the deep inguinal lymph nodes.

## Thigh Muscles That Move the Femur, Tibia, and Fibula

Deep fascia in the thigh separates it into medial, anterior, and posterior compartments (see {'Figure_11_6_1 Figure 11.6.1} and {'Figure_11_6_3 Figure 11.6.3}). The muscles in the  **medial compartment of the thigh** are responsible for adducting the femur at the hip. Along with the adductor longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, and pectineus, the strap-like  **gracilis** adducts the thigh in addition to flexing the leg at the knee.


{image:'Figure_11_6_3}
        

The muscles of the  **anterior compartment of the thigh** flex the thigh and extend the leg. This compartment contains the  **quadriceps femoris group**, which actually comprises four muscles that extend and stabilize the knee. The  **rectus femoris** is on the anterior aspect of the thigh, the  **vastus lateralis** is on the lateral aspect of the thigh, the  **vastus medialis** is on the medial aspect of the thigh, and the  **vastus intermedius** is between the vastus lateralis and vastus medialis and deep to the rectus femoris. The tendon common to all four is the  **quadriceps tendon** (patellar tendon), which inserts into the patella and continues below it as the  **patellar ligament**. The patellar ligament attaches to the tibial tuberosity. In addition to the quadriceps femoris, the  **sartorius** is a band-like muscle that extends from the anterior superior iliac spine to the medial side of the proximal tibia. This versatile muscle flexes the leg at the knee and flexes, abducts, and laterally rotates the leg at the hip. This muscle allows us to sit cross-legged.

The  **posterior compartment of the thigh** includes muscles that flex the leg and extend the thigh. The three long muscles on the back of the knee are the  **hamstring group**, which flexes the knee. These are the  **biceps femoris**,  **semitendinosus**, and  **semimembranosus**. The tendons of these muscles form the  **popliteal fossa**, the diamond-shaped space at the back of the knee.
