index: hide
name: Stem Modifications

Some plant species have modified stems that are especially suited to a particular habitat and environment ({'Figure_30_2_10abcdef Figure 30.2.10abcdef}). A  **rhizome** is a modified stem that grows horizontally underground and has nodes and internodes. Vertical shoots may arise from the buds on the rhizome of some plants, such as ginger and ferns.  **Corms** are similar to rhizomes, except they are more rounded and fleshy (such as in gladiolus). Corms contain stored food that enables some plants to survive the winter.  **Stolons** are stems that run almost parallel to the ground, or just below the surface, and can give rise to new plants at the nodes.  **Runners** are a type of stolon that runs above the ground and produces new clone plants at nodes at varying intervals: strawberries are an example.  **Tubers** are modified stems that may store starch, as seen in the potato ( *Solanum* sp.). Tubers arise as swollen ends of stolons, and contain many adventitious or unusual buds (familiar to us as the “eyes” on potatoes). A  **bulb**, which functions as an underground storage unit, is a modification of a stem that has the appearance of enlarged fleshy leaves emerging from the stem or surrounding the base of the stem, as seen in the iris.


{image:'Figure_30_2_10abcdef}
        

Some aerial modifications of stems are tendrils and thorns ({'Figure_30_2_11ab Figure 30.2.11ab}).  **Tendrils** are slender, twining strands that enable a plant (like a vine or pumpkin) to seek support by climbing on other surfaces.  **Thorns** are modified branches appearing as sharp outgrowths that protect the plant; common examples include roses, Osage orange, and devil’s walking stick.


{image:'Figure_30_2_11ab}
        
