index: hide
name: Probability Basics

Probabilities are mathematical measures of likelihood. The empirical probability of an event is calculated by dividing the number of times the event occurs by the total number of opportunities for the event to occur. It is also possible to calculate theoretical probabilities by dividing the number of times that an event is  *expected* to occur by the number of times that it could occur. Empirical probabilities come from observations, like those of Mendel. Theoretical probabilities, on the other hand, come from knowing how the events are produced and assuming that the probabilities of individual outcomes are equal. A probability of one for some event indicates that it is guaranteed to occur, whereas a probability of zero indicates that it is guaranteed not to occur. An example of a genetic event is a round seed produced by a pea plant.

In one experiment, Mendel demonstrated that the probability of the event “round seed” occurring was one in the F<sub>1</sub> offspring of true-breeding parents, one of which has round seeds and one of which has wrinkled seeds. When the F<sub>1</sub> plants were subsequently self-crossed, the probability of any given F<sub>2</sub> offspring having round seeds was now three out of four. In other words, in a large population of F<sub>2</sub> offspring chosen at random, 75 percent were expected to have round seeds, whereas 25 percent were expected to have wrinkled seeds. Using large numbers of crosses, Mendel was able to calculate probabilities and use these to predict the outcomes of other crosses.

## The Product Rule and Sum Rule

Mendel demonstrated that pea plants transmit characteristics as discrete units from parent to offspring. As will be discussed, Mendel also determined that different characteristics, like seed color and seed texture, were transmitted independently of one another and could be considered in separate probability analyses. For instance, performing a cross between a plant with green, wrinkled seeds and a plant with yellow, round seeds still produced offspring that had a 3:1 ratio of green:yellow seeds (ignoring seed texture) and a 3:1 ratio of round:wrinkled seeds (ignoring seed color). The characteristics of color and texture did not influence each other.

The  **product rule** of probability can be applied to this phenomenon of the independent transmission of characteristics. The product rule states that the probability of two independent events occurring together can be calculated by multiplying the individual probabilities of each event occurring alone. To demonstrate the product rule, imagine that you are rolling a six-sided die (D) and flipping a penny (P) at the same time. The die may roll any number from 1–6 (D<sub>#</sub>), whereas the penny may turn up heads (P<sub>H</sub>) or tails (P<sub>T</sub>). The outcome of rolling the die has no effect on the outcome of flipping the penny and vice versa. There are 12 possible outcomes of this action (), and each event is expected to occur with equal probability.


****

| Rolling Die | Flipping Penny |
|:-:|:-:|
| D<sub>1</sub> | P<sub>H</sub> |
| D<sub>1</sub> | P<sub>T</sub> |
| D<sub>2</sub> | P<sub>H</sub> |
| D<sub>2</sub> | P<sub>T</sub> |
| D<sub>3</sub> | P<sub>H</sub> |
| D<sub>3</sub> | P<sub>T</sub> |
| D<sub>4</sub> | P<sub>H</sub> |
| D<sub>4</sub> | P<sub>T</sub> |
| D<sub>5</sub> | P<sub>H</sub> |
| D<sub>5</sub> | P<sub>T</sub> |
| D<sub>6</sub> | P<sub>H</sub> |
| D<sub>6</sub> | P<sub>T</sub> |
    

Of the 12 possible outcomes, the die has a 2/12 (or 1/6) probability of rolling a two, and the penny has a 6/12 (or 1/2) probability of coming up heads. By the product rule, the probability that you will obtain the combined outcome 2 and heads is: (D<sub>2</sub>) x (P<sub>H</sub>) = (1/6) x (1/2) or 1/12 (). Notice the word “and” in the description of the probability. The “and” is a signal to apply the product rule. For example, consider how the product rule is applied to the dihybrid cross: the probability of having both dominant traits in the F<sub>2</sub> progeny is the product of the probabilities of having the dominant trait for each characteristic, as shown here:

<math display="block" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mfrac bevelled="true"><mn>3</mn><mn>4</mn></mfrac><mtext> </mtext><mo>×</mo><mtext> </mtext><mfrac bevelled="true"><mn>3</mn><mn>4</mn></mfrac><mtext> </mtext><mo>=</mo><mtext> </mtext><mtext>​</mtext><mfrac bevelled="true"><mn>9</mn><mrow><mn>16</mn></mrow></mfrac></mrow></math>

On the other hand, the  **sum rule** of probability is applied when considering two mutually exclusive outcomes that can come about by more than one pathway. The sum rule states that the probability of the occurrence of one event or the other event, of two mutually exclusive events, is the sum of their individual probabilities. Notice the word “or” in the description of the probability. The “or” indicates that you should apply the sum rule. In this case, let’s imagine you are flipping a penny (P) and a quarter (Q). What is the probability of one coin coming up heads and one coin coming up tails? This outcome can be achieved by two cases: the penny may be heads (P<sub>H</sub>) and the quarter may be tails (Q<sub>T</sub>), or the quarter may be heads (Q<sub>H</sub>) and the penny may be tails (P<sub>T</sub>). Either case fulfills the outcome. By the sum rule, we calculate the probability of obtaining one head and one tail as [(P<sub>H</sub>) × (Q<sub>T</sub>)] + [(Q<sub>H</sub>) × (P<sub>T</sub>)] = [(1/2) × (1/2)] + [(1/2) × (1/2)] = 1/2 (). You should also notice that we used the product rule to calculate the probability of P<sub>H</sub> and Q<sub>T</sub>, and also the probability of P<sub>T</sub> and Q<sub>H</sub>, before we summed them. Again, the sum rule can be applied to show the probability of having just one dominant trait in the F<sub>2</sub> generation of a dihybrid cross:

<math display="block" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mfrac bevelled="true"><mn>3</mn><mrow><mn>16</mn></mrow></mfrac><mtext> </mtext><mo>+</mo><mtext> </mtext><mfrac bevelled="true"><mn>3</mn><mn>4</mn></mfrac><mtext> </mtext><mo>=</mo><mtext> </mtext><mtext>​</mtext><mfrac bevelled="true"><mn>15</mn><mrow><mn>16</mn></mrow></mfrac></mrow></math>


****

| Product Rule | Sum Rule |
|:-:|:-:|
| For independent events A and B, the probability (P) of them both occurring (A  *and* B) is (P<sub>A</sub> × P<sub>B</sub>) | For mutually exclusive events A and B, the probability (P) that at least one occurs (A  *or* B) is (P<sub>A</sub> + P<sub>B</sub>) |
    

To use probability laws in practice, we must work with large sample sizes because small sample sizes are prone to deviations caused by chance. The large quantities of pea plants that Mendel examined allowed him calculate the probabilities of the traits appearing in his F<sub>2</sub> generation. As you will learn, this discovery meant that when parental traits were known, the offspring’s traits could be predicted accurately even before fertilization.
