index: hide
name: Mendelian Crosses

Mendel performed  **hybridizations**, which involve mating two true-breeding individuals that have different traits. In the pea, which is naturally self-pollinating, this is done by manually transferring pollen from the anther of a mature pea plant of one variety to the stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second variety. In plants, pollen carries the male gametes (sperm) to the stigma, a sticky organ that traps pollen and allows the sperm to move down the pistil to the female gametes (ova) below. To prevent the pea plant that was receiving pollen from self-fertilizing and confounding his results, Mendel painstakingly removed all of the anthers from the plant’s flowers before they had a chance to mature.

Plants used in first-generation crosses were called  **P0**, or parental generation one, plants (). Mendel collected the seeds belonging to the P<sub>0</sub> plants that resulted from each cross and grew them the following season. These offspring were called the  **F1**, or the first filial ( *filial*= offspring, daughter or son), generation. Once Mendel examined the characteristics in the F<sub>1</sub> generation of plants, he allowed them to self-fertilize naturally. He then collected and grew the seeds from the F<sub>1</sub> plants to produce the  **F2**, or second filial, generation. Mendel’s experiments extended beyond the F<sub>2</sub> generation to the F<sub>3</sub> and F<sub>4 </sub>generations, and so on, but it was the ratio of characteristics in the P<sub>0</sub>−F<sub>1</sub>−F<sub>2</sub> generations that were the most intriguing and became the basis for Mendel’s postulates.


{image:'Figure_12_1_2}
        
