index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.2
title: 4.2.2.2 - Longer Records of Arctic Ice Extent

For climate analysis, the variability of the sea ice cover prior to the commencement of the satellite record in 1979 is also of interest. There are a number of pre-satellite records, some based on regional observations taken from ships or aerial reconnaissance (e.g., {cite.4.'Walsh_and_Chapman_2001}; {cite.4.'Polyakov_et_al_2003}) while others were based on terrestrial proxies (e.g., Macias Fauria et al., 2010; {cite.4.'Kinnard_et_al_2011}). The records constructed by {cite.4.'Kinnard_et_al_2011 Kinnard et al. (2011)} and Macias Fauria et al. (2010) suggest that the decline of sea ice over the last few decades has been unprecedented over the past 1450 years (see {Chapters.5.5_5.5_5_2 Section 5.5.2}). In a study of the marginal seas near the Russian coastline using ice extent data from 1900 to 2000, {cite.4.'Polyakov_et_al_2003 Polyakov et al. (2003)} found a low frequency multi-decadal oscillation near the Kara Sea that shifted to a dominant decadal oscillation in the Chukchi Sea.

A more comprehensive basin-wide record, compiled by {cite.4.'Walsh_and_Chapman_2001 Walsh and Chapman (2001)}, showed very little interannual variability until the last three to four decades. For the period 1901 to 1998, their results show a summer mode that includes an anomaly of the same sign over nearly the entire Arctic and that captures the sea-ice {Glossary.*Trend trend} from recent satellite data. {'Figure_4_3 Figure 4.3} shows an updated record of the Walsh and Chapman data set with longer time coverage (1870 to 1978) that is more robust because it includes additional historical sea ice observations (e.g., from Danish meteorological stations). A comparison of this updated data set with that originally reported by {cite.4.'Walsh_and_Chapman_2001 Walsh and Chapman (2001)} shows similar interannual variability that is dominated by a nearly constant extent of the winter (January–February–March) and autumn (October–November–December) ice cover from 1870 to the 1950s. The absence of interannual variability during that period is due to the use of climatology to fill gaps, potentially masking the natural signal. {Glossary.*Sea_ice Sea ice} data from 1900–2011 as compiled by Met Office Hadley Centre are also plotted for comparison. In this data set, the 1979–2011 values were derived from various sources, including satellite data, as described by {cite.4.'Rayner_et_al_2003 Rayner et al. (2003)}. Since the 1950s, more in situ data are available and have been homogenized with the satellite record ({cite.4.'Meier_et_al_2012}). These data show a consistent decline in the sea ice cover that is relatively moderate during the winter but more dramatic during the summer months. Satellite data from other sources are also plotted in {'Figure_4_3 Figure 4.3}, including Scanning Multichannel Microwave Radiometer (SMMR) and Special Sensor Microwave/Imager (SSM/I) data using the Bootstrap Algorithm (SBA) as described by {cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008 Comiso and Nishio (2008)} and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Team Algorithm (NT1) as described by {cite.4.'Cavalieri_et_al_1984 Cavalieri et al. (1984)} (see Supplementary Material). Data from the Advanced Microwave Scanning Radiometer Earth Observing System (AMSR-E) using the Bootstrap Algorithm (ABA) and the NASA Team Algorithm Version 2 (NT2) are also presented. The error bars represent one standard deviation of the interannual variability during the satellite period. Because of the use of climatology to fill data gaps from 1870 to 1953, the error bars in the Walsh and Chapman data were set to twice that of the satellite period and 1.5 times higher for 1954 to 1978. The apparent reduction of the sea ice extent from 1978 to 1979 is in part due to the change from surface observations to satellite data. Generally, the temporal distributions from the various sources are consistent with some exceptions that may be {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to possible errors in the data (e.g., {cite.4.'Screen_2011} and Supplementary Material). Taking this into account, the various sources provide similar basic information and conclusions about the changing extent and variability of the Arctic sea ice cover.

{image:'Figure_4_3}
