index: hide
name: Ionic Electrolytes

Water and other polar molecules are attracted to ions, as shown in {'Figure_11_2_waterions Figure 11.2.waterions}. The electrostatic attraction between an ion and a molecule with a dipole is called an  **ion-dipole attraction**. These attractions play an important role in the dissolution of ionic compounds in water.


{image:'Figure_11_2_waterions}
        

When ionic compounds dissolve in water, the ions in the solid separate and disperse uniformly throughout the solution because water molecules surround and solvate the ions, reducing the strong electrostatic forces between them. This process represents a physical change known as  **dissociation**. Under most conditions, ionic compounds will dissociate nearly completely when dissolved, and so they are classified as strong electrolytes.

Let us consider what happens at the microscopic level when we add solid KCl to water. Ion-dipole forces attract the positive (hydrogen) end of the polar water molecules to the negative chloride ions at the surface of the solid, and they attract the negative (oxygen) ends to the positive potassium ions. The water molecules penetrate between individual K<sup>+</sup> and Cl<sup>−</sup> ions and surround them, reducing the strong interionic forces that bind the ions together and letting them move off into solution as solvated ions, as {'Figure_11_2_waterions Figure 11.2.waterions} shows. The reduction of the electrostatic attraction permits the independent motion of each hydrated ion in a dilute solution, resulting in an increase in the disorder of the system as the ions change from their fixed and ordered positions in the crystal to mobile and much more disordered states in solution. This increased disorder is responsible for the dissolution of many ionic compounds, including KCl, which dissolve with absorption of heat.

In other cases, the electrostatic attractions between the ions in a crystal are so large, or the ion-dipole attractive forces between the ions and water molecules are so weak, that the increase in disorder cannot compensate for the energy required to separate the ions, and the crystal is insoluble. Such is the case for compounds such as calcium carbonate (limestone), calcium phosphate (the inorganic component of bone), and iron oxide (rust).
