index: hide
name: Facial Bones of the Skull

The facial bones of the skull form the upper and lower jaws, the nose, nasal cavity and nasal septum, and the orbit. The facial bones include 14 bones, with six paired bones and two unpaired bones. The paired bones are the maxilla, palatine, zygomatic, nasal, lacrimal, and inferior nasal conchae bones. The unpaired bones are the vomer and mandible bones. Although classified with the brain-case bones, the ethmoid bone also contributes to the nasal septum and the walls of the nasal cavity and orbit.

## Maxillary Bone

The  **maxillary bone**, often referred to simply as the maxilla (plural = maxillae), is one of a pair that together form the upper jaw, much of the hard palate, the medial floor of the orbit, and the lateral base of the nose (see {'Figure_7_2_2 Figure 7.2.2}). The curved, inferior margin of the maxillary bone that forms the upper jaw and contains the upper teeth is the  **alveolar process of the maxilla** ({'Figure_7_2_12 Figure 7.2.12}). Each tooth is anchored into a deep socket called an alveolus. On the anterior maxilla, just below the orbit, is the infraorbital foramen. This is the point of exit for a sensory nerve that supplies the nose, upper lip, and anterior cheek. On the inferior skull, the  **palatine process** from each maxillary bone can be seen joining together at the midline to form the anterior three-quarters of the hard palate (see {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6} **a**). The  **hard palate** is the bony plate that forms the roof of the mouth and floor of the nasal cavity, separating the oral and nasal cavities.


{image:'Figure_7_2_12}
        

## Palatine Bone

The  **palatine bone** is one of a pair of irregularly shaped bones that contribute small areas to the lateral walls of the nasal cavity and the medial wall of each orbit. The largest region of each of the palatine bone is the  **horizontal plate**. The plates from the right and left palatine bones join together at the midline to form the posterior quarter of the hard palate (see {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6} **a**). Thus, the palatine bones are best seen in an inferior view of the skull and hard palate.

## Zygomatic Bone

The  **zygomatic bone** is also known as the cheekbone. Each of the paired zygomatic bones forms much of the lateral wall of the orbit and the lateral-inferior margins of the anterior orbital opening (see {'Figure_7_2_2 Figure 7.2.2}). The short temporal process of the zygomatic bone projects posteriorly, where it forms the anterior portion of the zygomatic arch (see {'Figure_7_2_3 Figure 7.2.3}).

## Nasal Bone

The  **nasal bone** is one of two small bones that articulate (join) with each other to form the bony base (bridge) of the nose. They also support the cartilages that form the lateral walls of the nose (see {'Figure_7_2_9 Figure 7.2.9}). These are the bones that are damaged when the nose is broken.

## Lacrimal Bone

Each  **lacrimal bone** is a small, rectangular bone that forms the anterior, medial wall of the orbit (see {'Figure_7_2_2 Figure 7.2.2} and {'Figure_7_2_3 Figure 7.2.3}). The anterior portion of the lacrimal bone forms a shallow depression called the  **lacrimal fossa**, and extending inferiorly from this is the  **nasolacrimal canal**. The lacrimal fluid (tears of the eye), which serves to maintain the moist surface of the eye, drains at the medial corner of the eye into the nasolacrimal canal. This duct then extends downward to open into the nasal cavity, behind the inferior nasal concha. In the nasal cavity, the lacrimal fluid normally drains posteriorly, but with an increased flow of tears due to crying or eye irritation, some fluid will also drain anteriorly, thus causing a runny nose.

## Inferior Nasal Conchae

The right and left inferior nasal conchae form a curved bony plate that projects into the nasal cavity space from the lower lateral wall (see {'Figure_7_2_11 Figure 7.2.11}). The inferior concha is the largest of the nasal conchae and can easily be seen when looking into the anterior opening of the nasal cavity.

## Vomer Bone

The unpaired vomer bone, often referred to simply as the vomer, is triangular-shaped and forms the posterior-inferior part of the nasal septum (see {'Figure_7_2_9 Figure 7.2.9}). The vomer is best seen when looking from behind into the posterior openings of the nasal cavity (see {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6} **a**). In this view, the vomer is seen to form the entire height of the nasal septum. A much smaller portion of the vomer can also be seen when looking into the anterior opening of the nasal cavity.

## Mandible

The  **mandible** forms the lower jaw and is the only moveable bone of the skull. At the time of birth, the mandible consists of paired right and left bones, but these fuse together during the first year to form the single U-shaped mandible of the adult skull. Each side of the mandible consists of a horizontal body and posteriorly, a vertically oriented  **ramus of the mandible** (ramus = “branch”). The outside margin of the mandible, where the body and ramus come together is called the  **angle of the mandible** ({'Figure_7_2_13 Figure 7.2.13}).

The ramus on each side of the mandible has two upward-going bony projections. The more anterior projection is the flattened  **coronoid process of the mandible**, which provides attachment for one of the biting muscles. The posterior projection is the  **condylar process of the mandible**, which is topped by the oval-shaped  **condyle**. The condyle of the mandible articulates (joins) with the mandibular fossa and articular tubercle of the temporal bone. Together these articulations form the temporomandibular joint, which allows for opening and closing of the mouth (see {'Figure_7_2_3 Figure 7.2.3}). The broad U-shaped curve located between the coronoid and condylar processes is the  **mandibular notch**.

Important landmarks for the mandible include the following:

  *  **Alveolar process of the mandible**—This is the upper border of the mandibular body and serves to anchor the lower teeth.
  *  **Mental protuberance**—The forward projection from the inferior margin of the anterior mandible that forms the chin (mental = “chin”).
  *  **Mental foramen**—The opening located on each side of the anterior-lateral mandible, which is the exit site for a sensory nerve that supplies the chin.
  *  **Mylohyoid line**—This bony ridge extends along the inner aspect of the mandibular body (see {'Figure_7_2_9 Figure 7.2.9}). The muscle that forms the floor of the oral cavity attaches to the mylohyoid lines on both sides of the mandible.
  *  **Mandibular foramen**—This opening is located on the medial side of the ramus of the mandible. The opening leads into a tunnel that runs down the length of the mandibular body. The sensory nerve and blood vessels that supply the lower teeth enter the mandibular foramen and then follow this tunnel. Thus, to numb the lower teeth prior to dental work, the dentist must inject anesthesia into the lateral wall of the oral cavity at a point prior to where this sensory nerve enters the mandibular foramen.
  *  **Lingula**—This small flap of bone is named for its shape (lingula = “little tongue”). It is located immediately next to the mandibular foramen, on the medial side of the ramus. A ligament that anchors the mandible during opening and closing of the mouth extends down from the base of the skull and attaches to the lingula.


{image:'Figure_7_2_13}
        
