index: hide
name: Bones of the Brain Case

The brain case contains and protects the brain. The interior space that is almost completely occupied by the brain is called the  **cranial cavity**. This cavity is bounded superiorly by the rounded top of the skull, which is called the  **calvaria** (skullcap), and the lateral and posterior sides of the skull. The bones that form the top and sides of the brain case are usually referred to as the “flat” bones of the skull.

The floor of the brain case is referred to as the base of the skull. This is a complex area that varies in depth and has numerous openings for the passage of cranial nerves, blood vessels, and the spinal cord. Inside the skull, the base is subdivided into three large spaces, called the  **anterior cranial fossa**,  **middle cranial fossa**, and  **posterior cranial fossa** (fossa = “trench or ditch”) ({'Figure_7_2_4 Figure 7.2.4}). From anterior to posterior, the fossae increase in depth. The shape and depth of each fossa corresponds to the shape and size of the brain region that each houses. The boundaries and openings of the cranial fossae (singular = fossa) will be described in a later section.


{image:'Figure_7_2_4}
        

The brain case consists of eight bones. These include the paired parietal and temporal bones, plus the unpaired frontal, occipital, sphenoid, and ethmoid bones.

## Parietal Bone

The  **parietal bone** forms most of the upper lateral side of the skull (see {'Figure_7_2_3 Figure 7.2.3}). These are paired bones, with the right and left parietal bones joining together at the top of the skull. Each parietal bone is also bounded anteriorly by the frontal bone, inferiorly by the temporal bone, and posteriorly by the occipital bone.

## Temporal Bone

The  **temporal bone** forms the lower lateral side of the skull (see {'Figure_7_2_3 Figure 7.2.3}). Common wisdom has it that the temporal bone (temporal = “time”) is so named because this area of the head (the temple) is where hair typically first turns gray, indicating the passage of time.

The temporal bone is subdivided into several regions ({'Figure_7_2_5 Figure 7.2.5}). The flattened, upper portion is the squamous portion of the temporal bone. Below this area and projecting anteriorly is the zygomatic process of the temporal bone, which forms the posterior portion of the zygomatic arch. Posteriorly is the mastoid portion of the temporal bone. Projecting inferiorly from this region is a large prominence, the  **mastoid process**, which serves as a muscle attachment site. The mastoid process can easily be felt on the side of the head just behind your earlobe. On the interior of the skull, the petrous portion of each temporal bone forms the prominent, diagonally oriented  **petrous ridge** in the floor of the cranial cavity. Located inside each petrous ridge are small cavities that house the structures of the middle and inner ears.


{image:'Figure_7_2_5}
        

Important landmarks of the temporal bone, as shown in {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6}, include the following:

  *  **External acoustic meatus** (ear canal)—This is the large opening on the lateral side of the skull that is associated with the ear.
  *  **Internal acoustic meatus**—This opening is located inside the cranial cavity, on the medial side of the petrous ridge. It connects to the middle and inner ear cavities of the temporal bone.
  *  **Mandibular fossa**—This is the deep, oval-shaped depression located on the external base of the skull, just in front of the external acoustic meatus. The mandible (lower jaw) joins with the skull at this site as part of the temporomandibular joint, which allows for movements of the mandible during opening and closing of the mouth.
  *  **Articular tubercle**—The smooth ridge located immediately anterior to the mandibular fossa. Both the articular tubercle and mandibular fossa contribute to the temporomandibular joint, the joint that provides for movements between the temporal bone of the skull and the mandible.
  *  **Styloid process**—Posterior to the mandibular fossa on the external base of the skull is an elongated, downward bony projection called the styloid process, so named because of its resemblance to a stylus (a pen or writing tool). This structure serves as an attachment site for several small muscles and for a ligament that supports the hyoid bone of the neck. (See also {'Figure_7_2_5 Figure 7.2.5}.)
  *  **Stylomastoid foramen**—This small opening is located between the styloid process and mastoid process. This is the point of exit for the cranial nerve that supplies the facial muscles.
  *  **Carotid canal**—The carotid canal is a zig-zag shaped tunnel that provides passage through the base of the skull for one of the major arteries that supplies the brain. Its entrance is located on the outside base of the skull, anteromedial to the styloid process. The canal then runs anteromedially within the bony base of the skull, and then turns upward to its exit in the floor of the middle cranial cavity, above the foramen lacerum.


{image:'Figure_7_2_6}
        

## Frontal Bone

The  **frontal bone** is the single bone that forms the forehead. At its anterior midline, between the eyebrows, there is a slight depression called the  **glabella** (see {'Figure_7_2_3 Figure 7.2.3}). The frontal bone also forms the supraorbital margin of the orbit. Near the middle of this margin, is the supraorbital foramen, the opening that provides passage for a sensory nerve to the forehead. The frontal bone is thickened just above each supraorbital margin, forming rounded brow ridges. These are located just behind your eyebrows and vary in size among individuals, although they are generally larger in males. Inside the cranial cavity, the frontal bone extends posteriorly. This flattened region forms both the roof of the orbit below and the floor of the anterior cranial cavity above (see {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6} **b**).

## Occipital Bone

The  **occipital bone** is the single bone that forms the posterior skull and posterior base of the cranial cavity ({'Figure_7_2_7 Figure 7.2.7}; see also {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6}). On its outside surface, at the posterior midline, is a small protrusion called the  **external occipital protuberance**, which serves as an attachment site for a ligament of the posterior neck. Lateral to either side of this bump is a  **superior nuchal line** (nuchal = “nape” or “posterior neck”). The nuchal lines represent the most superior point at which muscles of the neck attach to the skull, with only the scalp covering the skull above these lines. On the base of the skull, the occipital bone contains the large opening of the  **foramen magnum**, which allows for passage of the spinal cord as it exits the skull. On either side of the foramen magnum is an oval-shaped  **occipital condyle**. These condyles form joints with the first cervical vertebra and thus support the skull on top of the vertebral column.


{image:'Figure_7_2_7}
        

## Sphenoid Bone

The  **sphenoid bone** is a single, complex bone of the central skull ({'Figure_7_2_8 Figure 7.2.8}). It serves as a “keystone” bone, because it joins with almost every other bone of the skull. The sphenoid forms much of the base of the central skull (see {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6}) and also extends laterally to contribute to the sides of the skull (see {'Figure_7_2_3 Figure 7.2.3}). Inside the cranial cavity, the right and left  **lesser wings of the sphenoid bone**, which resemble the wings of a flying bird, form the lip of a prominent ridge that marks the boundary between the anterior and middle cranial fossae. The  **sella turcica** (“Turkish saddle”) is located at the midline of the middle cranial fossa. This bony region of the sphenoid bone is named for its resemblance to the horse saddles used by the Ottoman Turks, with a high back and a tall front. The rounded depression in the floor of the sella turcica is the  **hypophyseal (pituitary) fossa**, which houses the pea-sized pituitary (hypophyseal) gland. The  **greater wings of the sphenoid bone** extend laterally to either side away from the sella turcica, where they form the anterior floor of the middle cranial fossa. The greater wing is best seen on the outside of the lateral skull, where it forms a rectangular area immediately anterior to the squamous portion of the temporal bone.

On the inferior aspect of the skull, each half of the sphenoid bone forms two thin, vertically oriented bony plates. These are the  **medial pterygoid plate** and  **lateral pterygoid plate** (pterygoid = “wing-shaped”). The right and left medial pterygoid plates form the posterior, lateral walls of the nasal cavity. The somewhat larger lateral pterygoid plates serve as attachment sites for chewing muscles that fill the infratemporal space and act on the mandible.


{image:'Figure_7_2_8}
        

## Ethmoid Bone

The  **ethmoid bone** is a single, midline bone that forms the roof and lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity, the upper portion of the nasal septum, and contributes to the medial wall of the orbit ({'Figure_7_2_9 Figure 7.2.9} and {'Figure_7_2_10 Figure 7.2.10}). On the interior of the skull, the ethmoid also forms a portion of the floor of the anterior cranial cavity (see {'Figure_7_2_6 Figure 7.2.6} **b**).

Within the nasal cavity, the perpendicular plate of the ethmoid bone forms the upper portion of the nasal septum. The ethmoid bone also forms the lateral walls of the upper nasal cavity. Extending from each lateral wall are the superior nasal concha and middle nasal concha, which are thin, curved projections that extend into the nasal cavity ({'Figure_7_2_11 Figure 7.2.11}).

In the cranial cavity, the ethmoid bone forms a small area at the midline in the floor of the anterior cranial fossa. This region also forms the narrow roof of the underlying nasal cavity. This portion of the ethmoid bone consists of two parts, the crista galli and cribriform plates. The  **crista galli** (“rooster’s comb or crest”) is a small upward bony projection located at the midline. It functions as an anterior attachment point for one of the covering layers of the brain. To either side of the crista galli is the  **cribriform plate** (cribrum = “sieve”), a small, flattened area with numerous small openings termed olfactory foramina. Small nerve branches from the olfactory areas of the nasal cavity pass through these openings to enter the brain.

The lateral portions of the ethmoid bone are located between the orbit and upper nasal cavity, and thus form the lateral nasal cavity wall and a portion of the medial orbit wall. Located inside this portion of the ethmoid bone are several small, air-filled spaces that are part of the paranasal sinus system of the skull.


{image:'Figure_7_2_9}
        


{image:'Figure_7_2_10}
        


{image:'Figure_7_2_11}
        
