index: hide
name: Metabolism

The first law of thermodynamics holds that energy can neither be created nor destroyed—it can only change form. Your basic function as an organism is to consume (ingest) energy and molecules in the foods you eat, convert some of it into fuel for movement, sustain your body functions, and build and maintain your body structures. There are two types of reactions that accomplish this:  **anabolism** and  **catabolism**.

  *  **Anabolism** is the process whereby smaller, simpler molecules are combined into larger, more complex substances. Your body can assemble, by utilizing energy, the complex chemicals it needs by combining small molecules derived from the foods you eat
  *  **Catabolism** is the process by which larger more complex substances are broken down into smaller simpler molecules. Catabolism releases energy. The complex molecules found in foods are broken down so the body can use their parts to assemble the structures and substances needed for life.

Taken together, these two processes are called metabolism.  **Metabolism** is the sum of all anabolic and catabolic reactions that take place in the body ({'Figure_1_3_1 Figure 1.3.1}). Both anabolism and catabolism occur simultaneously and continuously to keep you alive.


{image:'Figure_1_3_1}
        

Every cell in your body makes use of a chemical compound,  **adenosine triphosphate (ATP)**, to store and release energy. The cell stores energy in the synthesis (anabolism) of ATP, then moves the ATP molecules to the location where energy is needed to fuel cellular activities. Then the ATP is broken down (catabolism) and a controlled amount of energy is released, which is used by the cell to perform a particular job.
