index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.2.1.3
title: 13.2.1.3 - The Last Interglacial Period

New data syntheses and model simulations since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} indicate that during the Last Interglacial Period ({Glossary.*Last_Interglacial LIG}, ~129 to 116 ka), global mean annual temperature was 1°C to 2oC warmer than pre-industrial (medium confidence) with peak global annual sea {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} (SSTs) that were 0.7°C ± 0.6°C warmer (medium confidence) ({Chapters.5.5_3.5_3_4 Section 5.3.4}). High latitude {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature}, averaged over several thousand years, was at least 2°C warmer than present (high confidence) ({Chapters.5.5_3.5_3_4 Section 5.3.4}). There is robust evidence and high agreement that under the different orbital {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} and warmer climate of the LIG, {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} was higher than present. There have been a large number of estimates of the magnitude of LIG GMSL rise from localities around the globe, but they are generally from a small number of RSL reconstructions, and do not consider {Glossary.*Glacial_isostatic_adjustment GIA} effects, which can be substantial ({Chapters.5.5_6.5_6_2 Section 5.6.2}). Since the AR4, two approaches have addressed GIA effects in order to infer LIG sea level from RSL observations at coastal sites. Kopp et al. (2009, 2013) obtained a probabilistic estimate of GMSL based on a large and geographically broadly distributed database of LIG sea level indicators. Their analysis accounted for GIA effects (and their {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}) as well as uncertainties in geochronology, the interpretation of sea level indicators, and regional tectonic uplift and subsidence. {cite.13.'Kopp_et_al_2013 Kopp et al. (2013)} concluded that GMSL was 6.4 m (95% probability) and 7.7 m (67% probability) higher than present, and with a 33% probability that it exceeded 8.8 m. The other approach, taken by {cite.13.'Dutton_and_Lambeck_2012 Dutton and Lambeck (2012)}, used data from far-field sites that are tectonically stable. Their estimate of 5.5 to 9 m LIG GMSL is consistent with the probabilistic estimates made by Kopp et al. (2009, 2013). {Chapters.5 Chapter 5} thus concluded there is very high confidence that the maximum GMSL during the LIG was at least 5 m higher than present and high confidence it did not exceed 10 m. The best estimate is 6 m higher than present. {Chapters.5 Chapter 5} also concluded from ice-sheet model simulations and elevation changes derived from a new Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_core ice core} that the Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} very likely contributed between 1.4 and 4.3 m {Glossary.*Sea_level_equivalent sea level equivalent}. This implies with medium confidence a contribution from the Antarctic ice sheet to the global {Glossary.*Mean_sea_level mean sea level} during the last interglacial period, but this is not yet supported by observational and model evidence.

There is medium confidence for a sea level fluctuation of up to 4 m during the LIG, but regional sea level variability and uncertainties in sea level proxies and their ages cause differences in the timing and amplitude of the reported fluctuation ({cite.13.'Kopp_et_al_2009}, 2013; {cite.13.'Thompson_et_al_2011}). For the time interval during the LIG in which GMSL was above present, there is high confidence that the maximum 1000year average rate of GMSL rise associated with the sea level fluctuation exceeded 2 m kyr–1 but that it did not exceed 7 m kyr–1 ({Chapters.5 Chapter 5}) ({cite.13.'Kopp_et_al_2013}). Faster rates lasting less than a millennium cannot be ruled out by these data. Therefore, there is high confidence that there were intervals when rates of GMSL rise during the LIG exceeded the 20th century rate of 1.7 [1.5 to 1.9] mm yr–1.
