index: hide
public: ar5-Box-11.1
name: Box 11.1
title: Box 11.1 - Climate Simulation, Projection, Predictability and Prediction

This section outlines some of the ideas and the terminology used in this chapter.

Internally generated and externally forced {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability}

It is useful for purposes of analysis and description to consider the pre-industrial climate system as being in a state of climatic equilibrium with a fixed atmospheric composition and an unchanging Sun. In this idealized state, naturally occurring processes and interactions within the climate system give rise to ‘internally generated’ climate variability on many time scales (as discussed in {Chapters.1 Chapter 1}). Variations in climate may also result due to features ‘external’ to this idealized system. Forcing factors, such as volcanic eruptions, solar variations, {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} changes in the composition of the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}, {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} etc., give rise to ‘externally forced’ climate variations. In this sense climate system variables such as annual mean temperatures (as in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_1 Figure 1} for instance) may be characterized as a combination of externally forced and internally generated components with T(t) = Tf(t) + Ti(t). This separation of T, and other climate variables, into components is useful when analysing climate behaviour but does not, of course, mean that the climate system is linear or that externally forced and internally generated components do not interact.

{image:'Box_11_1_Figure_1}

Climate simulation

A climate simulation is a model-based representation of the temporal behaviour of the climate system under specified {Glossary.*External_forcing external forcing} and boundary conditions. The result is the modelled response to the imposed external forcing combined with internally generated variability. The thin yellow lines in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_1 Figure 1} represent an {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of climate simulations begun from pre-industrial conditions with imposed historical external forcing. The imposed external conditions are the same for each ensemble member and differences among the simulations reflect differences in the evolutions of the internally generated component. Simulations are not intended to be forecasts of the observed evolution of the system (the black line in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}) but to be possible evolutions that are consistent with the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcings}.

In practice, and in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}, the forced component of the temperature variation is estimated by averaging over the different simulations of T(t) with Tf(t) the component that survives ensemble averaging (the red curve) while Ti(t) averages to near zero for a large enough ensemble. The spread among individual ensemble members (from these or pre-industrial simulations) and their behaviour with time provides some information on the statistics of the internally generated variability.

Climate {Glossary.*Projection projection}

A {Glossary.*Climate_projection climate projection} is a climate simulation that extends into the future based on a scenario of future external forcing. The simulations in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_1 Figure 1} become climate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} for the period beyond 2005 where the results are based on the RCP4.5 forcing scenario (see Chapters {Chapters.1} and {Chapters.8} for a discussion of forcing {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}).

{Glossary.*Climate_prediction Climate prediction}, {Glossary.*Climate_forecast climate forecast}

A climate prediction or climate forecast is a statement about the future evolution of some aspect of the climate system encompassing both forced and internally generated components. Climate {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} do not attempt to forecast the actual day-to-day progression of the system but instead the evolution of some climate statistic such as seasonal, annual or decadal averages or extremes, which may be for a particular location, or a regional or global average. Climate predictions are often made with models that are the same as, or similar to, those used to produce climate simulations and projections (assessed in {Chapters.9 Chapter 9}). A climate prediction typically proceeds by integrating the governing equations forward in time from observation-based initial conditions. A decadal climate prediction combines aspects of both a forced and an initial condition problem as illustrated in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_2 Figure 2}. At short time scales the evolution is largely dominated by the initial state while at longer time scales the influence of the initial conditions decreases and the importance of the forcing increases as illustrated in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_4 Figure 4}. Climate predictions may also be made using statistical methods which relate current to future conditions using statistical relationships derived from past system behaviour.

{image:'Box_11_1_Figure_2}

Because of the {Glossary.*Chaotic chaotic} and nonlinear nature of the climate system small differences, in initial conditions or in the formulation of the forecast model, result in different evolutions of forecasts with time. This is illustrated in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}, which displays an ensemble of forecasts of global annual mean temperature (the thin purple lines) initiated in 1998. The individual forecasts are begun from slightly different initial conditions, which are observation-based estimates of the state of the climate system. The thick green line is the average of these forecasts and is an attempt to predict the most probable outcome and to maximize forecast skill. In this schematic example, the 1998 initial conditions for the forecasts are warmer than the average of the simulations. The individual and ensemble mean forecasts exhibit a decline in global temperature before beginning to rise again. In this case, initialization has resulted in more realistic values for the forecasts than for the corresponding simulation, at least for short lead times in the forecast. As the individual forecasts evolve they diverge from one another and begin to resemble the projection results.

A probabilistic view of forecast behaviour is depicted schematically in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_3 Figure 3}. The probability distribution associated with the climate simulation of temperature evolves in response to external forcing. By contrast, the probability distribution associated with a climate forecast has a sharply peaked initial distribution representing the comparatively small {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in the observation-based initial state. The forecast probability distribution broadens with time until, ultimately, it becomes indistinguishable from that of an uninitialized climate projection.

Climate {Glossary.*Predictability predictability}

The term ‘predictability’, as used here, indicates the extent to which even minor imperfections in the knowledge of the current state or of the representation of the system limits knowledge of subsequent states. The rate of separation or divergence of initially close states of the climate system with time (as for the light purple lines in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}), or the rate of displacement and broadening of its probability distribution (as in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_3 Figure 3}) are indications of the system’s predictability. If initially close states separate rapidly (or the probability distribution broadens quickly towards the climatological distribution), the predictability of the system is low and vice versa. Formally, predictability in climate science is a feature of the physical system itself, rather than of our ‘ability to make skilful predictions in practice’. The latter depends on the accuracy of models and initial conditions and on the correctness with which the external forcing can be treated over the forecast period.

{image:'Box_11_1_Figure_3}

Forecast quality, forecast skill

Forecast (or prediction) quality measures the success of a prediction against observation-based information. Forecasts made for past cases, termed retrospective forecasts or hindcasts, may be analysed to give an indication of the quality that may be expected for future forecasts for a particular variable at a particular location.

The relative importance of initial conditions and of external forcing for climate prediction, as depicted schematically in {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_2 Figure 2}, is further illustrated in the example of {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}, {'Box_11_1_Figure_4 Figure 4} which plots correlation measures of both forecast skill and predictability for temperature averages over the globe ranging from a month to a decade. Initialized forecasts exhibit enhanced values compared to uninitialized simulations for shorter time averages but the advantage declines as averaging time increases and the forced component grows in importance.

{image:'Box_11_1_Figure_4}
