index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-11.1
name: FAQ 11.1
title: FAQ 11.1 - If You Cannot Predict the Weather Next Month, How Can You Predict Climate for the Coming Decade?

Although weather and climate are intertwined, they are in fact different things. Weather is defined as the state of the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} at a given time and place, and can change from hour to hour and day to day. Climate, on the other hand, generally refers to the statistics of weather conditions over a decade or more.

An ability to predict future climate without the need to accurately predict weather is more commonplace that it might first seem. For example, at the end of spring, it can be accurately predicted that the average air temperature over the coming summer in Melbourne (for example) will very likely be higher than the average temperature during the most recent spring—even though the day-to-day weather during the coming summer cannot be predicted with accuracy beyond a week or so. This simple example illustrates that factors exist—in this case the seasonal cycle in {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation} reaching the Southern Hemisphere—that can underpin skill in predicting changes in climate over a coming period that does not depend on accuracy in predicting weather over the same period.

The statistics of weather conditions used to define climate include long-term averages of air temperature and rainfall, as well as statistics of their variability, such as the standard deviation of year-to-year rainfall variability from the long-term average, or the frequency of days below 5°C. Averages of climate variables over long periods of time are called climatological averages. They can apply to individual months, seasons or the year as a whole. A {Glossary.*Climate_prediction climate prediction} will address questions like: ‘How likely will it be that the average temperature during the coming summer will be higher than the long-term average of past summers?’ or: ‘How likely will it be that the next decade will be warmer than past decades?’ More specifically, a climate prediction might provide an answer to the question: ‘What is the probability that temperature (in China, for instance) averaged over the next ten years will exceed the temperature in China averaged over the past 30 years?’ Climate {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} do not provide forecasts of the detailed day-to-day evolution of future weather. Instead, they provide probabilities of long-term changes to the statistics of future climatic variables.

Weather forecasts, on the other hand, provide predictions of day-to-day weather for specific times in the future. They help to address questions like: ‘Will it rain tomorrow?’ Sometimes, weather forecasts are given in terms of probabilities. For example, the weather forecast might state that: ‘the {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} of rainfall in Apia tomorrow is 75%’.

To make accurate weather predictions, forecasters need highly detailed information about the current state of the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}. The {Glossary.*Chaotic chaotic} nature of the atmosphere means that even the tiniest error in the depiction of ‘initial conditions’ typically leads to inaccurate forecasts beyond a week or so. This is the so-called ‘butterfly effect’.

Climate scientists do not attempt or claim to predict the detailed future evolution of the weather over coming seasons, years or decades. There is, on the other hand, a sound scientific basis for supposing that aspects of climate can be predicted, albeit imprecisely, despite the butterfly effect. For example, increases in long-lived atmospheric {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} concentrations tend to increase {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} in future decades. Thus, information from the past can and does help predict future climate.

Some types of naturally occurring so-called ‘internal’ variability can—in theory at least—extend the capacity to predict future climate. Internal climatic variability arises from natural instabilities in the climate system. If such variability includes or causes extensive, long-lived, upper ocean temperature anomalies, this will drive changes in the overlying atmosphere, both locally and remotely. The El Niño-{Glossary.*Southern_Oscillation Southern Oscillation} phenomenon is probably the most famous example of this kind of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}. Variability linked to the {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation El Niño-Southern Oscillation} unfolds in a partially predictable fashion. The butterfly effect is present, but it takes longer to strongly influence some of the variability linked to the El Nino-Southern Oscillation.

Meteorological services and other agencies have exploited this. They have developed seasonal-to-interannual prediction systems that enable them to routinely predict seasonal climate anomalies with demonstrable predictive skill. The skill varies markedly from place to place and variable to variable. Skill tends to diminish the further the prediction delves into the future and in some locations there is no skill at all. ‘Skill’ is used here in its technical sense: it is a measure of how much greater the accuracy of a prediction is, compared with the accuracy of some typically simple prediction method like assuming that recent anomalies will persist during the period being predicted.

Weather, seasonal-to-interannual and decadal prediction systems are similar in many ways (e.g., they all incorporate the same mathematical equations for the atmosphere, they all need to specify initial conditions to kick-start predictions, and they are all subject to limits on forecast accuracy imposed by the butterfly effect). However, decadal prediction, unlike weather and seasonal-to-interannual prediction, is still in its infancy. Decadal prediction systems nevertheless exhibit a degree of skill in hindcasting near-{Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} over much of the globe out to at least nine years. A ‘hindcast’ is a prediction of a past event in which only observations prior to the event are fed into the prediction system used to make the prediction. The bulk of this skill is thought to arise from {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing}. ‘{Glossary.*External_forcing External forcing}’ is a term used by climate scientists to refer to a forcing agent outside the climate system causing a change in the climate system. This includes increases in the concentration of long-lived greenhouse gases.

Theory indicates that skill in predicting decadal precipitation should be less than the skill in predicting decadal surface temperature, and hindcast performance is consistent with this expectation.

Current research is aimed at improving decadal prediction systems, and increasing the understanding of the reasons for any apparent skill. Ascertaining the degree to which the extra information from internal variability actually translates to increased skill is a key issue. While prediction systems are expected to improve over coming decades, the chaotic nature of the climate system and the resulting butterfly effect will always impose unavoidable limits on predictive skill. Other sources of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} exist. For example, as volcanic eruptions can influence climate but their timing and magnitude cannot be predicted, future eruptions provide one of a number of other sources of uncertainty. Additionally, the shortness of the period with enough oceanic data to initialize and assess decadal predictions presents a major challenge.

Finally, note that decadal prediction systems are designed to exploit both externally forced and internally generated sources of {Glossary.*Predictability predictability}. Climate scientists distinguish between decadal predictions and decadal {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}. Projections exploit only the predictive capacity arising from external forcing. While previous IPCC Assessment Reports focussed exclusively on projections, this report also assesses decadal prediction research and its scientific basis.
