index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-11.2
name: FAQ 11.2
title: FAQ 11.2 - How Do Volcanic Eruptions Affect Climate and Our Ability to Predict Climate?

Large volcanic eruptions affect the climate by injecting sulphur dioxide gas into the upper {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} (also called {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere}), which reacts with water to form clouds of sulphuric acid droplets. These clouds reflect sunlight back to space, preventing its energy from reaching the Earth’s surface, thus cooling it, along with the lower {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}. These upper atmospheric sulphuric acid clouds also locally absorb energy from the Sun, the Earth and the lower atmosphere, which heats the upper atmosphere (see {FAQ_11_2 FAQ 11.2}, {'FAQ_11_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}). In terms of surface cooling, the 1991 Mt Pinatubo eruption in the Philippines, for example, injected about 20 million tons of sulphur dioxide (SO2) into the stratosphere, cooling the Earth by about 0.5°C for up to a year. Globally, eruptions also reduce precipitation, because the reduced incoming shortwave at the surface is compensated by a reduction in latent heating (i.e., in evaporation and hence rainfall).

{image:'FAQ_11_2_Figure_1}

For the purposes of predicting climate, an eruption causing significant global surface cooling and upper atmospheric heating for the next year or so can be expected. The problem is that, while a volcano that has become more active can be detected, the precise timing of an eruption, or the amount of SO2 injected into the upper atmosphere and how it might disperse cannot be predicted. This is a {Glossary.*Source source} of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in {Topics.*Climate_Predictions climate predictions}.

Large volcanic eruptions produce lots of particles, called ash or tephra. However, these particles fall out of the atmosphere quickly, within days or weeks, so they do not affect the global climate. For example, the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption affected {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} in the northwest USA for several days but, because it emitted little SO2 into the stratosphere, it had no detectable global climate impacts. If large, high-latitude eruptions inject sulphur into the stratosphere, they will have an effect only in the hemisphere where they erupted, and the effects will only last a year at most, as the stratospheric cloud they produce only has a {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} of a few months.

Tropical or subtropical volcanoes produce more global surface or tropospheric cooling. This is because the resulting sulphuric acid cloud in the upper atmosphere lasts between one and two years, and can cover much of the globe. However, their regional climatic impacts are difficult to predict, because dispersion of stratospheric sulphate aerosols depends heavily on atmospheric wind conditions at the time of eruption. Furthermore, the surface cooling effect is typically not uniform: because continents cool more than the ocean, the summer {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon} can weaken, reducing rain over Asia and Africa. The climatic response is complicated further by the fact that upper atmospheric clouds from tropical eruptions also absorb sunlight and heat from the Earth, which produces more upper atmosphere warming in the tropics than at high latitudes.

The largest volcanic eruptions of the past 250 years stimulated scientific study. After the 1783 Laki eruption in Iceland, there were record warm summer temperatures in Europe, followed by a very cold winter. Two large eruptions, an unidentified one in 1809, and the 1815 Tambora eruption caused the ‘Year Without a Summer’ in 1816. Agricultural failures in Europe and the USA that year led to food shortages, famine and riots.

The largest eruption in more than 50 years, that of Agung in 1963, led to many modern studies, including observations and {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} calculations. Two subsequent large eruptions, El Chichón in 1982 and Pinatubo in 1991, inspired the work that led to our current understanding of the effects of volcanic eruptions on climate.

Volcanic clouds remain in the stratosphere only for a couple of years, so their impact on climate is correspondingly short. But the impacts of consecutive large eruptions can last longer: for example, at the end of the 13th century there were four large eruptions—one every ten years. The first, in 1258 CE, was the largest in 1000 years. That sequence of eruptions cooled the North Atlantic Ocean and Arctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}. Another period of interest is the three large, and several lesser, volcanic events during 1963–1991 (see {Chapters.8 Chapter 8} for how these eruptions affected atmospheric composition and reduced {Glossary.*Shortwave_radiation shortwave radiation} at the ground.

Volcanologists can detect when a volcano becomes more active, but they cannot predict whether it will erupt, or if it does, how much sulphur it might inject into the stratosphere. Nevertheless, volcanoes affect the ability to predict climate in three distinct ways. First, if a violent eruption injects significant volumes of sulphur dioxide into the stratosphere, this effect can be included in climate predictions. There are substantial challenges and sources of uncertainty involved, such as collecting good observations of the volcanic cloud, and calculating how it will move and change during its lifetime. But, based on observations, and successful modelling of recent eruptions, some of the effects of large eruptions can be included in predictions.

The second effect is that volcanic eruptions are a potential source of uncertainty in our predictions. Eruptions cannot be predicted in advance, but they will occur, causing short-term climatic impacts on both local and global scales. In principle, this potential uncertainty can be accounted for by including random eruptions, or eruptions based on some scenario in our near-term {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} climate predictions. This area of research needs further exploration. The future {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} in this report do not include future volcanic eruptions.

Third, the historical climate record can be used, along with estimates of observed sulphate aerosols, to test the fidelity of our climate simulations. While the climatic response to explosive volcanic eruptions is a useful analogue for some other climatic {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}, there are limitations. For example, successfully simulating the impact of one eruption can help validate models used for seasonal and interannual predictions. But in this way not all the mechanisms involved in global warming over the next century can be validated, because these involve long term oceanic feedbacks, which have a longer time scale than the response to individual volcanic eruptions.
