index: hide
name: Signs and Symptoms of Respiratory Infection

Microbial diseases of the respiratory system typically result in an acute inflammatory response. These infections can be grouped by the location affected and have names ending in “itis”, which literally means  *inflammation of*. For instance,  **rhinitis** is an inflammation of the nasal cavities, often characteristic of the common cold. Rhinitis may also be associated with hay fever allergies or other irritants. Inflammation of the sinuses is called  **sinusitis** inflammation of the ear is called  **otitis**. Otitis media is an inflammation of the middle ear. A variety of microbes can cause  **pharyngitis**, commonly known as a sore throat. An inflammation of the larynx is called  **laryngitis**. The resulting inflammation may interfere with vocal cord function, causing voice loss. When tonsils are inflamed, it is called  **tonsillitis**. Chronic cases of tonsillitis may be treated surgically with tonsillectomy. More rarely, the epiglottis can be infected, a condition called  **epiglottitis**. In the lower respiratory system, the inflammation of the bronchial tubes results in  **bronchitis**. Most serious of all is  **pneumonia**, in which the  **alveoli** in the lungs are infected and become inflamed. Pus and edema accumulate and fill the alveoli with fluids (called consolidations). This reduces the lungs’ ability to exchange gases and often results in a productive cough expelling phlegm and mucus. Cases of pneumonia can range from mild to life-threatening, and remain an important cause of mortality in the very young and very old.
