index: hide
name: Anatomy of the Upper Respiratory System

The  **respiratory system** can be conceptually divided into upper and lower regions at the point of the  **epiglottis**, the structure that seals off the lower respiratory system from the  **pharynx** during swallowing ({'Figure_22_1_UpperResp Figure 22.1.UpperResp}). The upper respiratory system is in direct contact with the external environment. The nares (or nostrils) are the external openings of the nose that lead back into the  **nasal cavity**, a large air-filled space behind the nares. These anatomical sites constitute the primary opening and first section of the respiratory tract, respectively. The nasal cavity is lined with hairs that trap large particles, like dust and pollen, and prevent their access to deeper tissues. The nasal cavity is also lined with a mucous membrane and Bowman’s glands that produce mucus to help trap particles and microorganisms for removal. The nasal cavity is connected to several other air-filled spaces. The sinuses, a set of four, paired small cavities in the skull, communicate with the nasal cavity through a series of small openings. The  **nasopharynx** is part of the upper throat extending from the posterior nasal cavity. The nasopharynx carries air inhaled through the nose. The middle ear is connected to the nasopharynx through the  **eustachian tube**. The middle ear is separated from the outer ear by the  **tympanic membrane**, or ear drum. And finally, the lacrimal glands drain to the nasal cavity through the  **nasolacrimal ducts** (tear ducts). The open connections between these sites allow microorganisms to move from the nasal cavity to the sinuses, middle ears (and back), and down into the lower respiratory tract from the nasopharynx.

The oral cavity is a secondary opening for the respiratory tract. The oral and nasal cavities connect through the fauces to the pharynx, or throat. The pharynx can be divided into three regions: the nasopharynx, the  **oropharynx**, and the  **laryngopharynx**. Air inhaled through the mouth does not pass through the nasopharynx; it proceeds first through the oropharynx and then through the laryngopharynx. The  **palatine tonsils**, which consist of lymphoid tissue, are located within the oropharynx. The laryngopharynx, the last portion of the pharynx, connects to the  **larynx**, which contains the vocal fold ({'Figure_22_1_UpperResp Figure 22.1.UpperResp}).


{image:'Figure_22_1_UpperResp}
        
