index: hide
name: G0 Phase

# G<sub>0</sub> Phase

Not all cells adhere to the classic cell-cycle pattern in which a newly formed daughter cell immediately enters interphase, closely followed by the mitotic phase. Cells in the  **G0 phase** are not actively preparing to divide. The cell is in a quiescent (inactive) stage, having exited the cell cycle. Some cells enter G<sub>0</sub> temporarily until an external signal triggers the onset of G<sub>1</sub>. Other cells that never or rarely divide, such as mature cardiac muscle and nerve cells, remain in G<sub>0</sub> permanently ({'Figure_6_2_4 Figure 6.2.4}).


{image:'Figure_6_2_4}
        

##  Control of the Cell Cycle

The length of the cell cycle is highly variable even within the cells of an individual organism. In humans, the frequency of cell turnover ranges from a few hours in early embryonic development to an average of two to five days for epithelial cells, or to an entire human lifetime spent in G<sub>0</sub> by specialized cells such as cortical neurons or cardiac muscle cells. There is also variation in the time that a cell spends in each phase of the cell cycle. When fast-dividing mammalian cells are grown in culture (outside the body under optimal growing conditions), the length of the cycle is approximately 24 hours. In rapidly dividing human cells with a 24-hour cell cycle, the G<sub>1</sub> phase lasts approximately 11 hours. The timing of events in the cell cycle is controlled by mechanisms that are both internal and external to the cell.
