index: hide
name: Interphase

During interphase, the cell undergoes normal processes while also preparing for cell division. For a cell to move from interphase to the mitotic phase, many internal and external conditions must be met. The three stages of interphase are called G<sub>1</sub>, S, and G<sub>2</sub>.

## G<sub>1</sub> Phase

The first stage of interphase is called the  **G1 phase**, or first gap, because little change is visible. However, during the G<sub>1</sub> stage, the cell is quite active at the biochemical level. The cell is accumulating the building blocks of chromosomal DNA and the associated proteins, as well as accumulating enough energy reserves to complete the task of replicating each chromosome in the nucleus.

## S Phase

Throughout interphase, nuclear DNA remains in a semi-condensed chromatin configuration. In the  **S phase** (synthesis phase), DNA replication results in the formation of two identical copies of each chromosome—sister chromatids—that are firmly attached at the centromere region. At this stage, each chromosome is made of two sister chromatids and is a duplicated chromosome. The centrosome is duplicated during the S phase. The two centrosomes will give rise to the  **mitotic** **spindle**, the apparatus that orchestrates the movement of chromosomes during mitosis. The centrosome consists of a pair of rod-like  **centrioles** at right angles to each other. Centrioles help organize cell division. Centrioles are not present in the centrosomes of many eukaryotic species, such as plants and most fungi.

## G<sub>2</sub> Phase

In the  **G2 phase**, or second gap, the cell replenishes its energy stores and synthesizes the proteins necessary for chromosome manipulation. Some cell organelles are duplicated, and the cytoskeleton is dismantled to provide resources for the mitotic spindle. There may be additional cell growth during G<sub>2</sub>. The final preparations for the mitotic phase must be completed before the cell is able to enter the first stage of mitosis.
