index: hide
name: Regulation at Internal Checkpoints

It is essential that daughter cells be exact duplicates of the parent cell. Mistakes in the duplication or distribution of the chromosomes lead to mutations that may be passed forward to every new cell produced from the abnormal cell. To prevent a compromised cell from continuing to divide, there are internal control mechanisms that operate at three main  **cell cycle checkpoints** at which the cell cycle can be stopped until conditions are favorable. These checkpoints occur near the end of G<sub>1</sub>, at the G<sub>2</sub>–M transition, and during metaphase ({'Figure_6_2_5 Figure 6.2.5}).


{image:'Figure_6_2_5}
        

## The G<sub>1</sub> Checkpoint

The G<sub>1</sub> checkpoint determines whether all conditions are favorable for cell division to proceed. The G<sub>1</sub> checkpoint, also called the restriction point, is the point at which the cell irreversibly commits to the cell-division process. In addition to adequate reserves and cell size, there is a check for damage to the genomic DNA at the G<sub>1</sub> checkpoint. A cell that does not meet all the requirements will not be released into the S phase.

## The G<sub>2</sub> Checkpoint

The G<sub>2</sub> checkpoint bars the entry to the mitotic phase if certain conditions are not met. As in the G<sub>1</sub> checkpoint, cell size and protein reserves are assessed. However, the most important role of the G<sub>2</sub> checkpoint is to ensure that all of the chromosomes have been replicated and that the replicated DNA is not damaged.

## The M Checkpoint

The M checkpoint occurs near the end of the metaphase stage of mitosis. The M checkpoint is also known as the spindle checkpoint because it determines if all the sister chromatids are correctly attached to the spindle microtubules. Because the separation of the sister chromatids during anaphase is an irreversible step, the cycle will not proceed until the kinetochores of each pair of sister chromatids are firmly anchored to spindle fibers arising from opposite poles of the cell.
