index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.7.2.2
title: 13.7.2.2 - Projections Based on Dynamical and Statistical Approaches

Projected changes in storm surges (relative to MSL) have been assessed by applying climate–model {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} to storm-surge models. Return periods of {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} extremes (see Glossary) exceeding a given threshold level, referred to as return levels, are used in quantifying projected changes. Using three regionally downscaled {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} for A2, B2 and A1B {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}, Debernard and Roed (2008) found an 8 to 10% increase in the 99th percentile surge heights between 1961–1990 and 2071–2100, mainly during the winter season, along the coastlines of the eastern North Sea and the northwestern British Isles, and decreases south of Iceland. Using a downscaled GCM under an A1B scenario, {cite.13.'Wang_et_al_2008 Wang et al. (2008)} projected a significant increase in wintertime storm surges around most of Ireland between 1961–1990 and 2031–2060. {cite.13.'Sterl_et_al_2009 Sterl et al. (2009)} concatenated the output from a 17-member {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of A1B simulations from a GCM over the periods 1950–2000 and 2050–2100 into a single longer time series to estimate 10,000-year return levels of surge heights along the Dutch coastline. No statistically significant change in this value was projected for the 21st century because projected wind speed changes were not associated with the maximum surge-generating northerlies. Using an ensemble of three {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} under A2 simulations, {cite.13.'Colberg_and_McInnes_2012 Colberg and McInnes (2012)} found that changes in the 95th percentile sea level height (with respect to {Glossary.*Mean_sea_level mean sea level}) across the southern Australian coast in 2081–2100 compared to 1981–2000 were small (±0.1 m), mostly negative, and despite some inter-model differences, resembled the changes in wind patterns simulated by the climate models ({cite.13.'McInnes_et_al_2011}). These studies demonstrate that the results are sensitive to the particular choice of GCM or {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model RCM}, therefore identifying {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} associated with the {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}. For the tropical east coast of Australia, {cite.13.'Harper_et_al_2009 Harper et al. (2009)} found that a 10% increase in tropical cyclone intensity for 2050 led to increases in the 100-year return level (including tides) that at most locations were smaller than 0.1 m with respect to mean sea level.

Several regional storm-surge studies have considered the relative contribution of the two main causative factors on changes in future sea level extremes (e.g., McInnes et al. (2009, 2013) for the southeastern coast of Australia; {cite.13.'Brown_et_al_2010 Brown et al. (2010)} for the eastern Irish Sea; {cite.13.'Woth_et_al_2006 Woth et al. (2006)} for the North Sea; {cite.13.'Lowe_et_al_2009 Lowe et al. (2009)} for the United Kingdom coast). They concluded that sea level rise has a greater potential than meteorological changes to increase sea level extremes by the end of the 21st century in these locations. {cite.13.'Unnikrishnan_et_al_2011 Unnikrishnan et al. (2011)} used RCM simulations to force a storm-surge model for the Bay of Bengal and found that the combined effect of MSL rise of 4 mm yr–1 and RCM projections for the A2 scenario (2071–2100) gave an increase in 100year return levels of total sea level (including tides) between 0.40 to 0.67 m (about 15 to 20%) along the northern part of the east coast of India, except around the head of the bay, compared to those in the base line (1961–1990) scenario.

Using six hypothetical hurricanes producing approximate 100-year return levels, {cite.13.'Smith_et_al_2010 Smith et al. (2010)} found that in the regions of large surges on the southeastern Louisiana coast, the effect of MSL rise added linearly to the simulated surges. However, in the regions of moderate surges (2–3 m), particularly in wetland-fronted areas, the increase in surge height was 1–3 m larger than the increase in mean sea level rise. They showed that sea level rise alters the speed of propagation of surges and their amplification in different regions of the coast. For the Gulf of Mexico, {cite.13.'Mousavi_et_al_2011 Mousavi et al. (2011)} developed a simple relationship between hurricane-induced storm surges, sea level rise and hurricane intensification through increased SSTs for three modelled major historical cyclones, concluding that the dynamic interaction of surge and sea level rise lowered or amplified the surge at different points within a shallow coastal bay.

Higher mean sea levels can significantly decrease the {Glossary.*Return_period return period} for exceeding given threshold levels. For a network of 198 tide gauges covering much of the globe, {cite.13.'Hunter_2012 Hunter (2012)} determined the factor by which the frequency of sea levels exceeding a given height would be increased for a MSL rise of 0.5 m ({'Figure_13_25 Figure 13.25}a). These calculations have been repeated here ({'Figure_13_25 Figure 13.25}b) using regional RSL projections and their uncertainty using the RCP4.5 scenario ({Chapters.13.13_6 Section 13.6}, {'Figure_13_19 Figure 13.19}a). This multiplication factor depends exponentially on the inverse of the Gumbel scale parameter (a factor that describes the statistics of sea level extremes caused by the combination of tides and storm surges) ({cite.13.'Coles_and_Tawn_1990}). The scale parameter is generally large where tides and/or storm surges are large, leading to a small multiplication factor, and vice versa. {'Figure_13_25 Figure 13.25}a shows that a 0.5 m MSL rise would likely result in the frequency of sea level extremes increasing by an order of magnitude or more in some regions. The multiplication factors are found to be similar or slightly higher, in general, when accounting for regional MSL projections ({'Figure_13_25 Figure 13.25}b). Specifically, in regions having higher regional projections of MSL, such as the east coast of Canada and the USA (where {Glossary.*Glacial_isostatic_adjustment GIA} results in a larger sea level rise) and/or in regions of large uncertainty (e.g. in regions near the former Laurentide {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} where the GIA uncertainty is large), the multiplication factor is higher, whereas in regions having lower regional projections of MSL, such as the northwest {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} of North America (where the land is rising due to present changes in glaciers and icecaps), the multiplication factor is lower. In another study, large increases in the frequency of sea level extremes for 2050 were found for a network of sites around the USA coastline based on semi-empirical MSL rise projections and 20th century statistics of extremes ({cite.13.'Tebaldi_et_al_2012}). Using projected time series of tides, MSL rise, components of sea level fluctuations from projected MSLP and wind stress fields, and a contribution for {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} variability through projected SSTs for the 21st century, {cite.13.'Cayan_et_al_2008 Cayan et al. (2008)} showed that for high-end scenarios of MSL rise, the frequency and magnitude of extremes along the California coast increases considerably relative to those experienced in the 20th century.

{image:'Figure_13_25}

In summary, dynamical and statistical methods on regional scales show that it is very likely that there will be an increase in the occurrence of future sea level extremes in some regions by 2100, with a likely increase in the early 21st century. The combined effects of MSL rise and changes in storminess will affect future extremes. There is high confidence that extremes will increase with MSL rise yet there is low confidence in region-specific projections in storminess and storm surges.
