index: hide
name: Titration Curve

Previously, when we studied acid-base reactions in solution, we focused only on the point at which the acid and base were stoichiometrically equivalent. No consideration was given to the pH of the solution before, during, or after the neutralization.

In the example, we calculated pH at four points during a titration.  shows a detailed sequence of changes in the pH of a strong acid and a weak acid in a titration with NaOH.


****

| Volume of 0.100  *M* NaOH Added (mL) | Moles of NaOH Added | pH Values 0.100  *M* HCl | pH Values 0.100  *M* CH<sub>3</sub>CO<sub>2</sub>H |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 0.0 | 0.0 | 1.00 | 2.87 |
| 5.0 | 0.00050 | 1.18 | 4.14 |
| 10.0 | 0.00100 | 1.37 | 4.57 |
| 15.0 | 0.00150 | 1.60 | 4.92 |
| 20.0 | 0.00200 | 1.95 | 5.35 |
| 22.0 | 0.00220 | 2.20 | 5.61 |
| 24.0 | 0.00240 | 2.69 | 6.13 |
| 24.5 | 0.00245 | 3.00 | 6.44 |
| 24.9 | 0.00249 | 3.70 | 7.14 |
| 25.0 | 0.00250 | 7.00 | 8.72 |
| 25.1 | 0.00251 | 10.30 | 10.30 |
| 25.5 | 0.00255 | 11.00 | 11.00 |
| 26.0 | 0.00260 | 11.29 | 11.29 |
| 28.0 | 0.00280 | 11.75 | 11.75 |
| 30.0 | 0.00300 | 11.96 | 11.96 |
| 35.0 | 0.00350 | 12.22 | 12.22 |
| 40.0 | 0.00400 | 12.36 | 12.36 |
| 45.0 | 0.00450 | 12.46 | 12.46 |
| 50.0 | 0.00500 | 12.52 | 12.52 |
    

The simplest acid-base reactions are those of a strong acid with a strong base.  shows data for the titration of a 25.0-mL sample of 0.100  *M* hydrochloric acid with 0.100  *M* sodium hydroxide. The values of the pH measured after successive additions of small amounts of NaOH are listed in the first column of this table, and are graphed in {'Figure_14_7_titration Figure 14.7.titration}, in a form that is called a  **titration curve**. The pH increases slowly at first, increases rapidly in the middle portion of the curve, and then increases slowly again. The point of inflection (located at the midpoint of the vertical part of the curve) is observed when the amount of base added is equivalent to the amount of acid in the sample according to the stoichiometry of the titration reaction. The volume of titrant containing this stoichiometric amount of base is called the equivalence point for the titration (see the earlier chapter on stoichiometry). For the titration of a strong acid with a strong base, the equivalence point occurs at a pH of 7.00 and the points on the titration curve can be calculated using solution stoichiometry ( and {'Figure_14_7_titration Figure 14.7.titration}).


{image:'Figure_14_7_titration}
        

The titration of a weak acid with a strong base (or of a weak base with a strong acid) is somewhat more complicated than that just discussed, but it follows the same general principles. Let us consider the titration of 25.0 mL of 0.100  *M* acetic acid (a weak acid) with 0.100  *M* sodium hydroxide and compare the titration curve with that of the strong acid.  gives the pH values during the titration, {'Figure_14_7_titration Figure 14.7.titration} shows the titration curve.

Although the initial volume and molarity of the acids are the same, there are important differences between the two titration curves. The titration curve for the weak acid begins at a higher value (less acidic) and maintains higher pH values up to the equivalence point. This is because acetic acid is a weak acid, which is only partially ionized. The pH at the equivalence point is also higher (8.72 rather than 7.00) due to the hydrolysis of acetate, a weak base that raises the pH:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><msub><mrow><mtext>CH</mtext></mrow><mn>3</mn></msub><msub><mrow><mtext>CO</mtext></mrow><mn>2</mn></msub><msup><mrow/><mtext>−</mtext></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>a</mi><mi>q</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>+</mo><msub><mtext>H</mtext><mn>2</mn></msub><mtext>O</mtext><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>l</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mspace width="0.2em"/><mo stretchy="false">⇌</mo><mspace width="0.2em"/><msub><mrow><mtext>CH</mtext></mrow><mn>3</mn></msub><msub><mrow><mtext>CO</mtext></mrow><mn>2</mn></msub><mtext>H</mtext><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>l</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>+</mo><msup><mrow><mtext>OH</mtext></mrow><mtext>−</mtext></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>a</mi><mi>q</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></math>

After the equivalence point, the two curves are identical because the pH is dependent on the excess of hydroxide ion in both cases.
