index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.4.3.2
title: 6.4.3.2 - Land Use Changes in Future Scenarios

{Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} and IAMs use a diversity of approaches for representing land use changes, including different land use classifications, parameter settings, and geographical scales. To implement {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} in a consistent manner across ESMs, a ‘harmonized’ set of annual gridded land use change during the period 1500–2100 was developed for input to the CMIP5 ESMs ({cite.6.'Hurtt_et_al_2011}).

Not all the CMIP5 ESMs used the full range of information available from the land use change {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}, such as wood harvest {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} or sub-grid scale shifting cultivation. Sensitivity studies indicated that these processes, along with the start date of the simulation, all strongly affect estimated carbon fluxes ({cite.6.'Hurtt_et_al_2011}; {cite.6.'Sentman_et_al_2011}).

Land use has been in the past and will be in the future a significant driver of {Glossary.*Forest forest} land cover change and terrestrial carbon storage. Land use trajectories in the {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} show very distinct trends and cover a wide range of projections. These land use trajectories are very sensitive to assumptions made by each individual IAM regarding the amount of land needed for food production ({'Figure_6_23 Figure 6.23}). The area of cropland and pasture increases in {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} with the Model for Energy Supply Strategy Alternatives and their General Environmental Impact (MESSAGE) IAM model, mostly driven by an increasing global population, but cropland area also increases in the {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} with the IMAGE IAM model, as a result of bio-energy production and increased food demand as well. RCP6 with the AIM model shows an expansion of cropland but a decline in pasture land. RCP4.5 with the Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM) IAM is the only scenario to show a decrease in global cropland. Several studies ({cite.6.'Wise_et_al_2009}; {cite.6.'Thomson_et_al_2010}; {cite.6.'Tilman_et_al_2011}) highlight the large sensitivity of future land use requirements to assumptions such as increases in crop yield, changes in diet, or how agricultural technology and intensification is applied.

{image:'Figure_6_23}

Within the IAMs, land use change is translated into land use {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} {Topics.*Emissions emissions} as shown in {'Figure_6_23 Figure 6.23}(b). Cumulative emissions for the 21st century ({'Figure_6_23 Figure 6.23}c) vary markedly across RCPs, with increasing cropland and pastureland areas in RCP2.6 and RCP8.5 giving rise to the highest emissions from land use change, RCP4.5 to intermediate emissions and RCP6.0 to close to zero net emissions. All scenarios suggest that 21st century land use emissions will be less than half of those from 1850 to the present day as rate of change of land conversion stabilises in future.

The adoption of widely differing approaches among ESMs for the treatment and diagnosis of land use and land cover change (LULCC) processes in terrestrial {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} models leads to substantial between model variation in the simulated impact on land carbon stocks. It is not yet possible to fully quantify LULCC fluxes from the CMIP5 model simulations. The harmonization process applied to LULCC data sets for CMIP5 has been an important step toward consistency among IAMs; however, among ESMs, and between IAMs and ESMs, assignment of meaningful {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} ranges to present-day and future LULCC fluxes and states remains a critical knowledge gap with implications for {Glossary.*Compatible_emissions compatible emissions} to achieve CO2 pathways ({Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_3.6_4_3_3 Section 6.4.3.3}; {cite.6.'Jones_et_al_2013}).
