index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.2.1
title: 8.3.2.1 - Carbon Dioxide

The tropospheric {Glossary.*Mixing_ratio mixing ratio} of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} has increased globally from 278 (276–280) ppm in 1750 to 390.5 (390.3 to 390.7) ppm in 2011 (see {Chapters.2.2_2.2_2_1.2_2_1_1.2_2_1_1_1 Section 2.2.1.1.1}). Here we assess the RF due to changes in atmospheric concentration rather than attributing it to {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Topics.*Emissions emissions}. {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_2.6_3_2_6 Section 6.3.2.6} describes how only a fraction of the historical CO2 emissions have remained in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}. The impact of {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} on CO2 from 1850 to 2000 was assessed in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} to be 12 to 35 ppm (0.17 to 0.51 W m–2).

Using the formula from Table 3 of {cite.8.'Myhre_et_al_1998 Myhre et al. (1998)}, and see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.1, the CO2 RF (as defined in {Chapters.8.8_1 Section 8.1}) from 1750 to 2011 is 1.82 (1.63 to 2.01) W m–2. The {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} is dominated by the radiative transfer modelling which is assessed to be 10% ({Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_1 Section 8.3.1}). The uncertainty in the knowledge of 1750 concentrations contributes only 2% (see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.2)

{'Table_8_2 Table 8.2} shows the concentrations and RF in AR4 (2005) and 2011 for the most important {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs}. {'Figure_8_6 Figure 8.6} shows the time evolution of RF and its rate of change. Since AR4, the RF of CO2 has increased by 0.16 W m–2 and continues the rate noted in AR4 of almost 0.3 W m–2 per decade. As shown in {'Figure_8_6 Figure 8.6}(d) the rate of increase in the RF from the WMGHGs over the last 15 years has been dominated by CO2. Since AR4, CO2 has accounted for more than 80% of the {Glossary.*Well_mixed_greenhouse_gas WMGHG} RF increase. The interannual variability in the rate of increase in the CO2 RF is due largely to variation in the natural land {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} whereas the {Glossary.*Trend trend} is driven by increasing anthropogenic emissions (see {'Figure_6_8 Figure 6.8} in {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_1 Section 6.3.1}).

{image:'Figure_8_6}

{table:'Table_8_2}

As described in {Chapters.8.8_1.8_1_1.8_1_1_3 Section 8.1.1.3}, CO2 can also affect climate through physical effects on lapse rates and clouds, leading to an {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} that will be different from the RF. Analysis of CMIP5 models ({cite.8.'Vial_et_al_2013}) found a large negative contribution to the ERF (20%) from the increase in land {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} which was compensated for by positive contributions from the combined effects on water vapour, {Glossary.*Lapse_rate lapse rate}, {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} and clouds. It is therefore not possible to conclude with the current information whether the ERF for CO2 is higher or lower than the RF. Therefore we assess the ratio ERF/RF to be 1.0 and assess our uncertainty in the CO2 ERF to be (–20% to 20%). We have medium confidence in this based on our understanding that the physical processes responsible for the differences between ERF and RF are small enough to be covered within the 20% uncertainty.

There are additional effects mediated through plant physiology, reducing the conductance of the plant stomata and hence the transpiration of water. {cite.8.'Andrews_et_al_2012b Andrews et al. (2012b)} find a physiological enhancement of the adjusted {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} by 3.5% due mainly to reductions in low cloud. This is smaller than a study with an earlier model by Doutriaux-{cite.8.'Boucher_et_al_2009 Boucher et al. (2009)} which found a 10% effect. Longer-term impacts of CO2 on vegetation distributions also affect climate (O’ishi et al., 2009; {cite.8.'Andrews_et_al_2012b}) but because of the longer time scale we choose to class these as feedbacks rather than rapid adjustments.
