index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.8.2.1
title: 10.8.2.1 - Estimates from Recent Temperature Change

As estimates of ECS based on recent temperature change can only sample atmospheric feedbacks that occur with presently evolving climate change, they provide information on the ‘effective {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity}’ (e.g., {cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2008}). As discussed in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, analyses based on global scale data find that within data {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}, a strong {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing or a large ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} might have masked a strong greenhouse warming (see, e.g., {cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2002}; {cite.10.'Frame_et_al_2005}; {cite.10.'Stern_2006}; {cite.10.'Roe_and_Baker_2007}; {cite.10.'Hannart_et_al_2009}; {cite.10.'Urban_and_Keller_2009}; {cite.10.'Church_et_al_2011}). This is consistent with the finding that a set of models with a large range of ECS and aerosol forcing could be consistent with the observed warming ({cite.10.'Kiehl_2007}). Consequently, such analyses find that constraints on aerosol forcing are essential to provide tighter constraints on future warming ({cite.10.'Tanaka_et_al_2009}; {cite.10.'Schwartz_et_al_2010}). {cite.10.'Aldrin_et_al_2012 Aldrin et al. (2012)} analyse the observed record from 1850 to 2007 for hemispheric means of {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature}, and upper 700 m ocean heat content since 1955. The authors use a simple {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} and a Markov Chain Monte Carlo Bayesian technique for analysis. The authors find a quite narrow range of ECS, which narrows further if using a uniform prior in 1/ECS rather than ECS ({'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}). If observations are updated to 2010 and forcing estimates including further indirect aerosol effects are used (following {cite.10.'Skeie_et_al_2011}), this yields a reduced upper tail (see {'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}b, dash dotted). However, this estimate involves a rather simple model for {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}, hence may underestimate uncertainties. {cite.10.'Olson_et_al_2012 Olson et al. (2012)} use similar global scale constraints and surface temperature to 2006, and ocean data to 2003 and arrive at a wide range if using a uniform prior in ECS, and a quite well constrained range if using a prior derived from current mean climate and Last Glacial Maximum ({Glossary.*Last_Glacial_Maximum LGM}) constraints (see {'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}b). Some of the differences between {cite.10.'Olson_et_al_2012 Olson et al. (2012)} and {cite.10.'Aldrin_et_al_2012 Aldrin et al. (2012)} may be due to structural differences in the model used (Aldrin et al. use a simple {Glossary.*Energy_Balance_Model EBM} while Olson use the UVIC {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMIC}), some due to different statistical methods and some due to use of global rather than hemispheric temperatures in the latter work. An approach based on regressing forcing histories used in 20th century simulations on observed {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} ({cite.10.'Schwartz_2012}) estimates ranges of ECS that encompass the AR4 ranges if accounting for data uncertainty ({'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}). {cite.10.'Otto_et_al_2013 Otto et al. (2013)} updated the {cite.10.'Gregory_et_al_2002 Gregory et al. (2002)} global {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} analysis (see equation above), using temperature and ocean heat content data to 2009 and estimates of RF that are approximately consistent with estimates from Chapters {Chapters.7} and {Chapters.8}, and ocean heat uptake estimates that are consistent with {Chapters.3 Chapter 3} and find that inclusion of recent deep ocean heat uptake and temperature data considerably narrow estimates of ECS compared to results using data to the less recent past.

Estimates of ECS and TCR that make use of both spatial and temporal information, or separate the GHG attributable warming using {Glossary.*Fingerprint fingerprint} methods, can yield tighter estimates (e.g., {cite.10.'Frame_et_al_2005}; {cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2008}; {cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2011}). The resulting GHG attributable warming tends to be reasonably robust to uncertainties in aerosol forcing ({Chapters.10.10_3.10_3_1.10_3_1_1.10_3_1_1_3 Section 10.3.1.1.3}). {cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2008 Forest et al. (2008)} have updated their earlier study using a newer version of the MIT model and five different surface temperature data sets ({cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2011}). Correction of statistical errors in estimation procedure pointed out by Lewis (see {cite.10.'Lewis_2013}) changes their result only slightly ({cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2013}). The overarching 5 to 95% range of effective climate sensitivity widens to 1.2°C to 5.3°C when all five data sets are used, and constraints on effective ocean diffusivity become very weak ({cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2008}). Uncertainties would likely further increase if estimates of forcing uncertainty, for example, due to natural {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}, are also included ({cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2006}). {cite.10.'Lewis_2013 Lewis (2013)} reanalysed the data used in {cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2006 Forest et al. (2006)} using an objective {Glossary.*Bayesian_method_approach Bayesian method} (see discussion at top of section). The author finds that use of a Jeffreys prior narrows the upper tail considerably, to 3.6°C for the 95th percentile. When revising the method, omitting upper air data, and adding 6 more years of data a much reduced 5 to 95% range of 1.2°C to 2.2°C results (see {'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}), similar to estimates by {cite.10.'Ring_et_al_2012 Ring et al. (2012)} using data to 2008. Lewis’s upper limit extends to 3.0°C if accounting for forcing and surface temperature uncertainty ({cite.10.'Lewis_2013}). {cite.10.'Lewis_2013 Lewis (2013)} also reports a range of 1.1°C to 2.9°C using his revised diagnostics and the {cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2006 Forest et al. (2006)} statistical method, whereas adding 9 more years to the {cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2013 Libardoni and Forest (2013)} corrected diagnostic (after {cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2011}; {'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}; using an expert prior in both cases), does not change results much ({'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}b). The differences between results reported in {cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2008 Forest et al. (2008)}; {cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2011 Libardoni and Forest (2011)}; {cite.10.'Lewis_2013 Lewis (2013)}; {cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2013 Libardoni and Forest (2013)} are still not fully understood, but appear to be due to a combination of sensitivity of results to the choice of analysis period as well as differences in diagnostics and statistical approach.

In summary, analyses that use the most recent decade find a tightening of the range of ECS based on a combination of recent heat uptake and surface temperature data. Results consistently give low probability to ECS values under 1.0°C ({'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}). The mode of the PDFs varies considerably with period considered as expected from the influence of internal variability on the single realization of observed climate change. Estimates including the most recent data tend to have reduced upper tails ({cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2011}; {cite.10.'Aldrin_et_al_2012} and update; {cite.10.'Ring_et_al_2012} and update cf. {'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}; {cite.10.'Lewis_2013}; {cite.10.'Otto_et_al_2013}), although further uncertainty in statistical assumptions and structural uncertainties in simple models used, as well as neglected uncertainties, for example, in forcings, increase assessed uncertainty.
