index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.1
title: 4.2.2.1 - Total Arctic Sea Ice Extent and Concentration

{'Figure_4_2 Figure 4.2} (derived from passive microwave data) shows both the seasonality of the Arctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} cover and the large decadal changes that have occurred over the last 34 years. Typically, Arctic sea ice reaches its maximum seasonal extent in February or March whereas the minimum occurs in September at the end of summer melt. Changes in decadal averages in Arctic ice extent are more pronounced in summer than in winter. The change in winter extent between 1979–1988 and 1989–1998 was negligible. Between 1989–1998 and 1999–2008, there was a decrease in winter extent of around 0.6 × 106 km2. This can be contrasted to a decrease in ice extent at the end of the summer (September) of 0.5 × 106 km2 between 1979–1988 and 1989–1998, followed by a further decrease of 1.2 × 106 km2 between 1989–1998 and 1999–2008. {'Figure_4_2 Figure 4.2} also shows that the change in extent from 1979–1988 to 1989–1998 was statistically significant mainly in spring and summer while the change from 1989–1998 to 1999–2008 was statistically significant during winter and summer. The largest interannual changes occur during the end of summer when only the thick components of the winter ice cover survive the summer melt ({cite.4.'Comiso_et_al_2008}; {cite.4.'Comiso_2012}).

{image:'Figure_4_2}

For comparison, the average extents during the 2009–2012 period are also presented: the extent during this period was considerably less than in earlier periods in all seasons, except spring. The summer minimum extent was at a record low in 2012 following an earlier record set in 2007 ({cite.4.'Stroeve_et_al_2007}; {cite.4.'Comiso_et_al_2008}). The minimum ice extent in 2012 was 3.44 × 106 km2 while the low in 2007 was 4.22 × 106 km2. For comparison, the record high value was 7.86 × 106 km2 in 1980. The low extent in 2012 (which is 18.5% lower than in 2007) was probably caused in part by an unusually strong storm in the Central Arctic Basin on 4 to 8 August 2012 ({cite.4.'Parkinson_and_Comiso_2013}). The extents for 2007 and 2012 were almost the same from June until the storm period in 2012, after which the extent in 2012 started to {Glossary.*Trend trend} considerably lower than in 2007. The error bars, which represent 1 standard deviation (1σ) of samples used to estimate each data point, are smallest in the first decade and get larger with subsequent decades indicating much higher interannual variability in recent years. The error bars are also comparable in summer and winter during the first decade but become progressively larger for summer compared to winter in subsequent decades. These results indicate that the largest interannual variability has occurred in the summer and in the recent decade.

Although relatively short as a climate record, the 34-year satellite record is long enough to allow determination of significant and consistent trends of the time series of monthly anomalies (i.e., difference between the monthly and the averages over the 34-year record) of ice extent, area and concentration. The trends in ice concentration for the winter, spring, summer and autumn for the period November 1978 to December 2012 are shown in {'Figure_4_2 Figure 4.2} (b, c, d and e). The seasonal trends for different regions, except the Bering Sea, are negative. Ice cover changes are relatively large in the eastern Arctic Basin and most peripheral seas in winter and spring, while changes are pronounced almost everywhere in the Arctic Basin, except at greater than 82°N, in summer and autumn. In connection with a comprehensive observational research program during the International Polar Year 2007–2008, regional studies primarily on the Canadian side of the Arctic revealed very similar patterns of spatial and interannual variability of the sea ice cover ({cite.4.'Derksen_et_al_2012}).

From the monthly anomaly data, the trend in sea ice extent in the Northern Hemisphere (NH) for the period from November 1978 to December 2012 is –3.8 ± 0.3% per decade (very likely) (see {FAQ_4_1 FAQ 4.1}). The error quoted is calculated from the standard deviation of the slope of the regression line. The baseline for the monthly anomalies is the average of all data for each month from November 1978 to December 2012. The trends for different regions vary greatly, ranging from +7.3% per decade in the Bering Sea to –13.8% per decade in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. This large spatial variability is associated with the complexity of the atmospheric and oceanic circulation system as manifested in the Arctic Oscillation ({cite.4.'Thompson_and_Wallace_1998}). The trends also differ with season ({cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008}; {cite.4.'Comiso_et_al_2011}). For the entire NH, the trends in ice extent are –2.3 ± 0.5%, –1.8 ± 0.5%, –6.1 ± 0.8% and –7.0 ± 1.5% per decade (very likely) in winter, spring, summer and autumn, respectively. The corresponding trends in ice area are –2.8 ± 0.5%, –2.2 ± 0.5%, –7.2 ± 1.0%, and –7.8 ± 1.3% per decade (very likely). Similar results were obtained by ({cite.4.'Cavalieri_and_Parkinson_2012}) but cannot be compared directly since their data are for the period from 1979 to 2010 (see Supplementary Material). The trends for ice extent and ice area are comparable except in the summer and autumn, when the trend in ice area is significantly more than that in ice extent. This is due in part to increasing open water areas within the pack that may be caused by more frequent storms and more divergence in the summer ({cite.4.'Simmonds_et_al_2008}). The trends are larger in the summer and autumn mainly because of the rapid decline in the multi-year ice cover ({cite.4.'Comiso_2012}), as discussed in {Chapters.4.4_2.4_2_2.4_2_2_3 Section 4.2.2.3}. The trends in km2 yr–1 were estimated as in {cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008 Comiso and Nishio (2008)} and {cite.4.'Comiso_2012 Comiso (2012)} but the percentage trends presented in this chapter were calculated differently. Here the percentage is calculated as a difference from the first data point on the trend line whereas the earlier estimations used the difference from the mean value. The new percentage trends are only slightly different from the previous ones and the conclusions about changes are the same.
