index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.4.2.3
title: 8.4.2.3 - Records of Past Volcanism and Effects of Very Large Eruptions

Although the effects of volcanic eruptions on climate are largest in the 2 years following a large stratospheric injection, and the winter warming effect in the NH has been supported by long-term records ({cite.8.'Fischer_et_al_2007}), there is new work indicating extended volcanic impacts via long-term memory in the ocean heat content and {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} ({cite.8.'Stenchikov_et_al_2009}; {cite.8.'Gregory_2010}; Otterä et al., 2010). {cite.8.'Zanchettin_et_al_2012 Zanchettin et al. (2012)} found changes in the North Atlantic Ocean circulation that imply strengthened northward oceanic heat transport a decade after major eruptions, which contributes to the emergence of extensive winter warming over the continental NH along with persistent cooling over Arctic regions on decadal time scales, in agreement with {cite.8.'Zhong_et_al_2011 Zhong et al. (2011)} and {cite.8.'Miller_et_al_2012 Miller et al. (2012)}.

New work on the mechanisms by which a supereruption ({cite.8.'Self_and_Blake_2008}) could force climate has focused on the 74,000 BP eruption of the Toba volcano (2.5°N, 99.0°E). {cite.8.'Robock_et_al_2009 Robock et al. (2009)} used simulations of up to 900 times the 1991 Mt Pinatubo sulphate injection to show that the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} is weaker than that {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} based on a linear relationship with the sulphate {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} injection. The results agreed with a previous simulation by {cite.8.'Jones_et_al_2005 Jones et al. (2005)}. They also showed that chemical interactions with {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} had small impacts on the forcing and that the idea of {cite.8.'Bekki_et_al_1996 Bekki et al. (1996)} that water vapour would limit and prolong the growth of aerosols was not supported. {cite.8.'Timmreck_et_al_2010 Timmreck et al. (2010)} however, incorporating the idea of {cite.8.'Pinto_et_al_1989 Pinto et al. (1989)} that aerosols would grow and therefore both have less RF per unit mass and fall out of the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} more quickly, found much less of a radiative impact from such a large stratospheric input.
