index: hide
name: Chlamydia

 **Chlamydia trachomatis** is the causative agent of the STI  **chlamydia** ({'Figure_23_3_Ctrachomat Figure 23.3.Ctrachomat}). While many  *Chlamydia* infections are asymptomatic, chlamydia is a major cause of nongonococcal urethritis (NGU) and may also cause  **epididymitis** and  **orchitis** in men. In women, chlamydia infections can cause urethritis,  **salpingitis**, and PID. In addition, chlamydial infections may be associated with an increased risk of  **cervical cancer**.

Because chlamydia is widespread, often asymptomatic, and has the potential to cause substantial complications, routine screening is recommended for sexually active women who are under age 25, at high risk (i.e., not in a monogamous relationship), or beginning prenatal care.

Certain serovars of  *C. trachomatis* can cause an infection of the lymphatic system in the groin known as  **lymphogranuloma venereum**. This condition is commonly found in tropical regions and can also co-occur in conjunction with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. After the microbes invade the lymphatic system, buboes (large lymph nodes, see {'Figure_23_3_Ctrachomat Figure 23.3.Ctrachomat}) form and can burst, releasing pus through the skin. The male genitals can become greatly enlarged and in women the rectum may become narrow.

Urogenital infections caused by  *C. trachomatis* can be treated using  **azithromycin** or  **doxycycline** (the recommended regimen from the CDC). Erythromycin,  **levofloxacin**, and  **ofloxacin** are alternatives.


{image:'Figure_23_3_Ctrachomat}
        
