index: hide
name: Bacterial Vaginitis and Vaginosis

Inflammation of the vagina is called  **vaginitis**, often caused by a bacterial infection. It is also possible to have an imbalance in the normal  **vaginal microbiota** without inflammation called  **bacterial vaginosis (BV)**. Vaginosis may be asymptomatic or may cause mild symptoms such as a thin, white-to-yellow, homogeneous vaginal discharge, burning, odor, and itching. The major causative agent is  **Gardnerella vaginalis**, a gram-variable to gram-negative pleomorphic bacterium. Other causative agents include anaerobic species such as members of the genera  **Bacteroides** and  **Fusobacterium**. Additionally, ureaplasma and mycoplasma may be involved. The disease is usually self-limiting, although antibiotic treatment is recommended if symptoms develop.

 *G. vaginalis* appears to be more virulent than other vaginal bacterial species potentially associated with BV. Like  **Lactobacillus** spp.,  *G. vaginalis* is part of the normal vaginal microbiota, but when the population of  *Lactobacillus* spp. decreases and the  **vaginal pH** increases,  *G. vaginalis* flourishes, causing vaginosis by attaching to vaginal epithelial cells and forming a thick protective  **biofilm**.  *G. vaginalis* also produces a cytotoxin called  **vaginolysin** that lyses vaginal epithelial cells and red blood cells.

Since  *G. vaginalis* can also be isolated from healthy women, the “gold standard” for the diagnosis of BV is direct examination of vaginal secretions and not the culture of  *G. vaginalis*. Diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis from vaginal secretions can be accurately made in three ways. The first is to use a  **DNA probe**. The second method is to assay for  **sialidase activity** (sialidase is an enzyme produced by  *G. vaginalis* and other bacteria associated with vaginosis, including  *Bacteroides* spp.,  **Prevotella** spp., and  **Mobiluncus** spp.). The third method is to assess gram-stained vaginal smears for microscopic morphology and relative numbers and types of bacteria, squamous epithelial cells, and leukocytes. By examining slides prepared from  **vaginal swabs**, it is possible to distinguish lactobacilli (long, gram-positive rods) from other gram-negative species responsible for BV. A shift in predominance from gram-positive bacilli to gram-negative coccobacilli can indicate BV. Additionally, the slide may contain so-called  **clue cells**, which are epithelial cells that appear to have a granular or stippled appearance due to bacterial cells attached to their surface ({'Figure_23_3_VagSmear Figure 23.3.VagSmear}). Presumptive diagnosis of bacterial vaginosis can involve an assessment of clinical symptoms and evaluation of vaginal fluids using  **Amsel’s diagnostic criteria** which include 3 out of 4 of the following characteristics:

  1. white to yellow discharge;
  2. a fishy odor, most noticeable when 10% KOH is added;
  3. pH greater than 4.5;
  4. the presence of clue cells.

Treatment is often unnecessary because the infection often clears on its own. However, in some cases, antibiotics such as topical or oral  **clindamycin** or  **metronidazole** may be prescribed. Alternative treatments include oral  **tinidazole** or clindamycin ovules (vaginal suppositories).


{image:'Figure_23_3_VagSmear}
        
