index: hide
name: Chancroid

The sexually transmitted infection  **chancroid** is caused by the gram-negative rod  **Haemophilus ducreyi**. It is characterized by  **soft chancres** **(**{'Figure_23_3_Chancroid Figure 23.3.Chancroid}) on the genitals or other areas associated with sexual contact, such as the mouth and anus. Unlike the hard chancres associated with syphilis, soft chancres develop into painful, open sores that may bleed or produce fluid that is highly contagious. In addition to causing chancres, the bacteria can invade the lymph nodes, potentially leading to pus discharge through the skin from lymph nodes in the groin. Like other genital lesions, soft chancres are of particular concern because they compromise the protective barriers of the skin or mucous membranes, making individuals more susceptible to HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases.

Several virulence factors have been associated with  *H. ducreyi*, including  **lipooligosaccharide**s, protective outer membrane proteins,  **antiphagocytic proteins**, secretory proteins, and  **collagen-specific adhesin NcaA**. The collagen-specific adhesion NcaA plays an important role in initial cellular attachment and colonization. Outer membrane proteins DsrA and DltA have been shown to provide protection from serum-mediated killing by antibodies and complement.

 *H. ducreyi* is difficult to culture; thus, diagnosis is generally based on clinical observation of genital ulcers and tests that rule out other diseases with similar ulcers, such as syphilis and genital herpes. PCR tests for  *H. ducreyi* have been developed in some laboratories, but as of 2015 none had been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Recommended treatments for chancroid include antibiotics such as  **azithromycin**,  **ciprofloxacin**,  **erythromycin** and  **ceftriaxone**. Resistance to ciprofloxacin and erythromycin has been reported.


{image:'Figure_23_3_Chancroid}
        
