index: hide
name: X-Ray Crystallography

The size of the unit cell and the arrangement of atoms in a crystal may be determined from measurements of the  *diffraction* of X-rays by the crystal, termed  **X-ray crystallography**.  **Diffraction** is the change in the direction of travel experienced by an electromagnetic wave when it encounters a physical barrier whose dimensions are comparable to those of the wavelength of the light. X-rays are electromagnetic radiation with wavelengths about as long as the distance between neighboring atoms in crystals (on the order of a few Å).

When a beam of monochromatic X-rays strikes a crystal, its rays are scattered in all directions by the atoms within the crystal. When scattered waves traveling in the same direction encounter one another, they undergo  *interference*, a process by which the waves combine to yield either an increase or a decrease in amplitude (intensity) depending upon the extent to which the combining waves’ maxima are separated (see {'Figure_10_6_ConDec Figure 10.6.ConDec}).


{image:'Figure_10_6_ConDec}
        

When X-rays of a certain wavelength,  *λ*, are scattered by atoms in adjacent crystal planes separated by a distance,  *d*, they may undergo constructive interference when the difference between the distances traveled by the two waves prior to their combination is an integer factor,  *n*, of the wavelength. This condition is satisfied when the angle of the diffracted beam,  *θ*, is related to the wavelength and interatomic distance by the equation:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mi>n</mi><mi>λ</mi><mo>=</mo><mn>2</mn><mi>d</mi><mspace width="0.2em"/><mtext>sin</mtext><mspace width="0.2em"/><mi>θ</mi></mrow></math>

This relation is known as the  **Bragg equation** in honor of W. H.  **Bragg**, the English physicist who first explained this phenomenon. {'Figure_10_6_XRyDiff1 Figure 10.6.XRyDiff1} illustrates two examples of diffracted waves from the same two crystal planes. The figure on the left depicts waves diffracted at the Bragg angle, resulting in constructive interference, while that on the right shows diffraction and a different angle that does not satisfy the Bragg condition, resulting in destructive interference.


{image:'Figure_10_6_XRyDiff1}
        

An X-ray diffractometer, such as the one illustrated in {'Figure_10_7_XRyDiff2 Figure 10.7.XRyDiff2}, may be used to measure the angles at which X-rays are diffracted when interacting with a crystal as described earlier. From such measurements, the Bragg equation may be used to compute distances between atoms as demonstrated in the following example exercise.


{image:'Figure_10_7_XRyDiff2}
        
