index: hide
name: The Lymphatic System

The  **lymphatic system** is also a network of vessels that run throughout the body ({'Figure_25_1_LymphSyst Figure 25.1.LymphSyst}). However, these vessels do not form a full circulating system and are not pressurized by the heart. Rather, the lymphatic system is an open system with the fluid moving in one direction from the extremities toward two drainage points into veins just above the heart. Lymphatic fluids move more slowly than blood because they are not pressurized. Small lymph capillaries interact with blood capillaries in the interstitial spaces in tissues. Fluids from the tissues enter the lymph capillaries and are drained away ({'Figure_25_1_CapBed Figure 25.1.CapBed}). These fluids, termed  **lymph**, also contain large numbers of white blood cells.


{image:'Figure_25_1_LymphSyst}
        


{image:'Figure_25_1_CapBed}
        

The lymphatic system contains two types of lymphoid tissues. The  **primary lymphoid tissue** includes bone marrow and the thymus. Bone marrow contains the hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) that differentiate and mature into the various types of blood cells and lymphocytes (see {'Figure_17_5_Hematopo Figure 17.5.Hematopo}). The  **secondary lymphoid tissue** **s** include the spleen, lymph nodes, and several areas of diffuse lymphoid tissues underlying epithelial membranes. The  **spleen**, an encapsulated structure, filters blood and captures pathogens and antigens that pass into it ({'Figure_25_1_spleenLnode Figure 25.1.spleenLnode}). The spleen contains specialized macrophages and dendritic cells that are crucial for antigen presentation, a mechanism critical for activation of T lymphocytes and B lymphocytes (see <link:>). Lymph nodes are bean-shaped organs situated throughout the body. These structures contain areas called germinal centers that are rich in B and T lymphocytes. The  **lymph nodes** also contain macrophages and dendritic cells for antigen presentation. Lymph from nearby tissues enters the lymph node through afferent lymphatic vessels and encounters these lymphocytes as it passes through; the lymph exits the lymph node through the efferent lymphatic vessels ({'Figure_25_1_spleenLnode Figure 25.1.spleenLnode}).


{image:'Figure_25_1_spleenLnode}
        
