index: hide
name: The Circulatory System

The circulatory (or cardiovascular) system is a closed network of organs and vessels that moves blood around the body ({'Figure_25_1_CircSyst Figure 25.1.CircSyst}). The primary purposes of the  **circulatory system** are to deliver nutrients, immune factors, and oxygen to tissues and to carry away waste products for elimination. The  **heart** is a four-chambered pump that propels the blood throughout the body. Deoxygenated blood enters the right atrium through the superior vena cava and the inferior vena cava after returning from the body. The blood next passes through the tricuspid valve to enter the right ventricle. When the heart contracts, the blood from the right ventricle is pumped through the pulmonary arteries to the lungs. There, the blood is oxygenated at the alveoli and returns to the heart through the pulmonary veins. The oxygenated blood is received at the left atrium and proceeds through the mitral valve to the left ventricle. When the heart contracts, the oxygenated blood is pumped throughout the body via a series of thick-walled vessels called arteries. The first and largest  **artery** is called the aorta. The arteries sequentially branch and decrease in size (and are called arterioles) until they end in a network of smaller vessels called capillaries. The  **capillary** beds are located in the interstitial spaces within tissues and release nutrients, immune factors, and oxygen to those tissues. The capillaries connect to a series of vessels called venules, which increase in size to form the  **vein**s. The veins join together into larger vessels as they transfer blood back to the heart. The largest veins, the superior and inferior vena cava, return the blood to the right atrium.


{image:'Figure_25_1_CircSyst}
        

Other organs play important roles in the circulatory system as well. The  **kidneys** filter the blood, removing waste products and eliminating them in the urine. The  **liver** also filters the blood and removes damaged or defective red blood cells. The  **spleen** filters and stores blood, removes damaged red blood cells, and is a reservoir for immune factors. All of these filtering structures serve as sites for entrapment of microorganisms and help maintain an environment free of microorganisms in the blood.
