index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 3.2.3
title: 3.2.3 - Upper Ocean Heat Content

Global integrals of 0 to 700 m UOHC ({'Figure_3_2 Figure 3.2}a) estimated from ocean temperature measurements all show a gain from 1971 to 2010 ({cite.3.'Palmer_et_al_2007}; {cite.3.'Smith_and_Murphy_2007}; e.g., {cite.3.'Domingues_et_al_2008}; {cite.3.'Ishii_and_Kimoto_2009}; {cite.3.'Levitus_et_al_2012}) . These estimates usually start around 1950, although as noted in {Chapters.3.3_2.3_2_1 Section 3.2.1} and discussed in the Appendix, historical data coverage is sparse, so global integrals are increasingly uncertain for earlier years, especially prior to 1970. There is some convergence towards agreement in instrument bias correction algorithms since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({Chapters.3.3_2.3_2_1 Section 3.2.1}), but other sources of uncertainty include the different assumptions regarding mapping and integrating UOHCs in sparsely sampled regions, differences in quality control of temperature data, and differences among baseline climatologies used for estimating changes in heat content ({cite.3.'Lyman_et_al_2010}). Although there are still apparent interannual variations about the upward {Glossary.*Trend trend} of global UOHC since 1970, different global estimates have variations at different times and for different periods, suggesting that sub-decadal variability in the time rate of change is still quite uncertain in the historical record. Most of the estimates in {'Figure_3_2 Figure 3.2}a do exhibit decreases for a few years immediately following major volcanic eruptions in 1963, 1982 and 1991 ({cite.3.'Domingues_et_al_2008}).

{image:'Figure_3_2}

Again, all of the global integrals of UOHC in {'Figure_3_2 Figure 3.2}a have increased between 1971 and 2010. Linear trends fit to the UOHC estimates for the relatively well-sampled 40-year period from 1971 to 2010 estimate the heating rate required to account for this warming: 118 [82 to 154] TW (1 TW = 1012 watts) for {cite.3.'Levitus_et_al_2012 Levitus et al. (2012)}, 98 [67 to 130] TW for {cite.3.'Ishii_and_Kimoto_2009 Ishii and Kimoto (2009)}, 137 [120 to 154] TW for {cite.3.'Domingues_et_al_2008 Domingues et al. (2008)}, 108 [80 to 136] TW for {cite.3.'Palmer_et_al_2007 Palmer et al. (2007)}, and 74 [43 to 105] TW for {cite.3.'Smith_and_Murphy_2007 Smith and Murphy (2007)}. Uncertainties are calculated as 90% confidence intervals for an ordinary least squares fit, taking into account the reduction in the degrees of freedom implied by the temporal correlation of the residuals. Although these rates of energy gain do not all agree within their statistical {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}, all are positive, and all are statistically different from zero. Generally the smaller trends are for estimates that assume zero anomalies in areas of sparse data, as expected for that choice, which will tend to reduce trends and variability. Hence the assessment of the Earth’s energy {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} ({Box_3_1 Box 3.1}) employs a global UOHC estimate ({cite.3.'Domingues_et_al_2008}) chosen because it fills in sparsely sampled areas and estimates uncertainties using a statistical analysis of ocean variability patterns.

Globally integrated ocean heat content in three of the five 0 to 700 m estimates appear to be increasing more slowly from 2003 to 2010 than over the previous decade ({'Figure_3_2 Figure 3.2}a). Although this apparent change is concurrent with a slowing of the increase global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}, as discussed in {Box_9_2 Box 9.2}, this is also a time period when the ocean observing system transitioned from predominantly XBT to predominantly Argo temperature measurements ({cite.3.'Johnson_and_Wijffels_2011}). Shifts in observing systems can sometimes introduce spurious signals, so this apparent recent change should be viewed with caution.
