index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.4.7.3
title: 6.4.7.3 - Future Methane Hydrate Emissions

Substantial quantities of methane are believed to be stored within submarine hydrate deposits at continental margins (see also {Chapters.6.6_1 Section 6.1}, {FAQ_6_1 FAQ 6.1}). There is concern that warming of overlying waters may melt these deposits, releasing {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} into the ocean and {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} systems. Overall, it is likely that subsequent {Topics.*Emissions emissions} to the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} caused by hydrate destabilisation would be in the form of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}, due to CH4 oxidation in the water column.

Considering a potential warming of bottom waters by 1°C, 3°C and 5°C during the next 100 years, {cite.6.'Reagan_and_Moridis_2007 Reagan and Moridis (2007)} found that hydrates residing in a typical deep ocean setting (4°C and 1000 m depth) would be stable and in shallow low-latitude settings (6°C and 560 m) any sea floor CH4 fluxes would be oxidized within the sediments. Only in cold-shallow Arctic settings (0.4°C and 320 m) would CH4 fluxes exceed rates of benthic sediment oxidation. Simulations of heat penetration through the sediment by {cite.6.'Fyke_and_Weaver_2006 Fyke and Weaver (2006)} suggest that changes in the gas hydrate stability zone will be small on century time scales except in high-latitude regions of shallow ocean shelves. In the longer term, {cite.6.'Archer_et_al_2009a Archer et al. (2009a)} estimated that between 35 and 940 PgC could be released over several thousand years in the future following a 3°C seafloor warming.

Using multiple {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} ({cite.6.'Lamarque_2008}), {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} an upper estimate of the global sea floor flux of between 560 and 2140 Tg(CH4) yr–1, mostly in the high latitudes. {cite.6.'Hunter_et_al_2013 Hunter et al. (2013)} also found 21st century hydrate dissociation in shallow Arctic waters and comparable in magnitude to {cite.6.'Biastoch_et_al_2011 Biastoch et al. (2011)}, although maximum CH4 sea floor fluxes were smaller than {cite.6.'Lamarque_2008 Lamarque (2008)}, with emissions from 330 to 450 Tg(CH4) yr–1 for RCP 4.5 to {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}. Most of the sea floor flux of CH4 is expected to be oxidised in the water column into dissolved CO2. {cite.6.'Mau_et_al_2007 Mau et al. (2007)} suggest only 1% might be released to the atmosphere but this fraction depends on the depth of water and ocean conditions. {cite.6.'Elliott_et_al_2011 Elliott et al. (2011)} demonstrated significant impacts of such sea floor release on marine hypoxia and acidity, although atmospheric CH4 release was small.

Observations of CH4 release along the Svalbard margin seafloor ({cite.6.'Westbrook_et_al_2009}) suggest observed regional warming of 1°C during the last 30 years is driving hydrate disassociation, an idea supported by modelling ({cite.6.'Reagan_and_Moridis_2009}). However, these studies do not consider subsea-{Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost} hydrates suggested recently to be regionally significant sources of atmospheric CH4 ({cite.6.'Shakhova_et_al_2010}). There was no positive excursion in the methane concentration recorded in ice cores from the largest known submarine landslide, the Storegga slide of Norway 8200 years ago. Large methane hydrate release due to marine landslides is unlikely as any given landslide could release only a tiny fraction of the global inventory ({cite.6.'Archer_2007}).

There is low confidence in modelling abilities to simulate transient changes in hydrate inventories, but large CH4 release to the atmosphere during this century is unlikely.
