index: hide
name: Supercritical Fluids

Within the last 15 years, the use of  **supercritical fluids**, especially supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO<sub>2</sub>), has gained popularity for certain sterilizing applications. When carbon dioxide is brought to approximately 10 times atmospheric pressure, it reaches a supercritical state that has physical properties between those of liquids and gases. Materials put into a chamber in which carbon dioxide is pressurized in this way can be sterilized because of the ability of scCO<sub>2</sub> to penetrate surfaces.

Supercritical carbon dioxide works by penetrating cells and forming  **carbonic acid**, thereby lowering the cell pH considerably. This technique is effective against vegetative cells and is also used in combination with peracetic acid to kill endospores. Its efficacy can also be augmented with increased temperature or by rapid cycles of pressurization and depressurization, which more likely produce cell lysis.

Benefits of scCO<sub>2</sub> include the nonreactive, nontoxic, and nonflammable properties of carbon dioxide, and this protocol is effective at low temperatures. Unlike other methods, such as heat and irradiation, that can degrade the object being sterilized, the use of scCO<sub>2</sub> preserves the object’s integrity and is commonly used for treating foods (including spices and juices) and medical devices such as endoscopes. It is also gaining popularity for disinfecting tissues such as skin, bones, tendons, and ligaments prior to transplantation. scCO<sub>2</sub> can also be used for pest control because it can kill insect eggs and larvae within products.
