index: hide
name: Chemical Food Preservatives

Chemical  **preservatives** are used to inhibit microbial growth and minimize spoilage in some foods. Commonly used chemical preservatives include  **sorbic acid**,  **benzoic acid**, and  **propionic acid**, and their more soluble salts  **potassium sorbate**,  **sodium benzoate**, and  **calcium propionate**, all of which are used to control the growth of molds in acidic foods. Each of these preservatives is nontoxic and readily metabolized by humans. They are also flavorless, so they do not compromise the flavor of the foods they preserve.

Sorbic and benzoic acids exhibit increased efficacy as the pH decreases. Sorbic acid is thought to work by inhibiting various cellular enzymes, including those in the citric acid cycle, as well as  **catalases** and  **peroxidases**. It is added as a preservative in a wide variety of foods, including dairy, bread, fruit, and vegetable products. Benzoic acid is found naturally in many types of fruits and berries, spices, and fermented products. It is thought to work by decreasing intracellular pH, interfering with mechanisms such as  **oxidative phosphorylation** and the uptake of molecules such as amino acids into cells. Foods preserved with benzoic acid or sodium benzoate include fruit juices, jams, ice creams, pastries, soft drinks, chewing gum, and pickles.

Propionic acid is thought to both inhibit enzymes and decrease intracellular pH, working similarly to benzoic acid. However, propionic acid is a more effective preservative at a higher pH than either sorbic acid or benzoic acid. Propionic acid is naturally produced by some cheeses during their ripening and is added to other types of cheese and baked goods to prevent mold contamination. It is also added to raw dough to prevent contamination by the bacterium  **Bacillus mesentericus**, which causes bread to become ropy.

Other commonly used chemical preservatives include  **sulfur dioxide** and  **nitrites**. Sulfur dioxide prevents browning of foods and is used for the preservation of dried fruits; it has been used in winemaking since ancient times. Sulfur dioxide gas dissolves in water readily, forming  **sulfites**. Although sulfites can be metabolized by the body, some people have sulfite allergies, including asthmatic reactions. Additionally, sulfites degrade thiamine, an important nutrient in some foods. The mode of action of sulfites is not entirely clear, but they may interfere with the  **disulfide bond** (see {'Figure_7_4_tertiary Figure 7.4.tertiary}) formation in proteins, inhibiting enzymatic activity. Alternatively, they may reduce the intracellular pH of the cell, interfering with proton motive force-driven mechanisms.

Nitrites are added to processed meats to maintain color and stop the germination of  **Clostridium botulinum** endospores. Nitrites are reduced to  **nitric oxide**, which reacts with heme groups and iron-sulfur groups. When nitric oxide reacts with the heme group within the myoglobin of meats, a red product forms, giving meat its red color. Alternatively, it is thought that when nitric acid reacts with the iron-sulfur enzyme  **ferredoxin** within bacteria, this electron transport-chain carrier is destroyed, preventing ATP synthesis. Nitrosamines, however, are carcinogenic and can be produced through exposure of nitrite-preserved meats (e.g., hot dogs, lunch meat, breakfast sausage, bacon, meat in canned soups) to heat during cooking.

## Natural Chemical Food Preservatives

The discovery of natural antimicrobial substances produced by other microbes has added to the arsenal of preservatives used in food.  **Nisin** is an antimicrobial peptide produced by the bacterium  **Lactococcus lactis** and is particularly effective against gram-positive organisms. Nisin works by disrupting cell wall production, leaving cells more prone to lysis. It is used to preserve cheeses, meats, and beverages.

 **Natamycin** is an antifungal macrolide antibiotic produced by the bacterium  **Streptomyces natalensis**. It was approved by the FDA in 1982 and is used to prevent fungal growth in various types of dairy products, including cottage cheese, sliced cheese, and shredded cheese. Natamycin is also used for meat preservation in countries outside the United States.


****

| Chemical   | Mode of Action    | Example Uses  |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|   *Phenolics* |
|  Cresols<br /> o-Phenylphenol<br /> Hexachlorophene<br /> Triclosan    | Denature proteins and disrupt membranes   |  Disinfectant in Lysol<br /> Prevent contamination of crops (citrus)<br /> Antibacterial soap<br /> pHisoHex for handwashing in hospitals    |
|   *Metals*    |
|  Mercury<br /> Silver<br /> Copper<br /> Nickel<br /> Zinc   |  Bind to proteins and inhibit enzyme activity    |  Topical antiseptic<br /> Treatment of wounds and burns<br /> Prevention of eye infections in newborns<br /> Antibacterial in catheters and bandages<br /> Mouthwash<br /> Algicide for pools and fish tanks<br /> Containers for long-term water storage    |
|   *Halogens*    |
|  Iodine<br /> Chlorine<br /> Fluorine  |  Oxidation and destabilization of cellular macromolecules    |  Topical antiseptic<br /> Hand scrub for medical personnel<br /> Water disinfectant<br /> Water treatment plants<br /> Household bleach<br /> Food processing<br /> Prevention of dental carries    |
|   *Alcohols*    |
|  Ethanol <br /> Isopropanol    |  Denature proteins and disrupt membranes    |  Disinfectant<br /> Antiseptic    |
|   *Surfactants*    |
| Quaternary ammonium salts    | Lowers surface tension of water to help with washing away   of microbes, and disruption of cell membranes    |  Soaps and detergent<br /> Disinfectant<br /> Antiseptic<br /> Mouthwash    |
|   *Bisbiguanides*    |
|  Chlorhexidine<br /> Alexidine |  Disruption of cell membranes |  Oral rinse<br /> Hand scrub for medical personnel    |
|   *Alkylating Agents*    |
| Formaldehyde<br /> Glutaraldehyde<br /> o-Phthalaldehyde<br /> Ethylene oxide<br /> β-Propionolactone    | Inactivation of enzymes and nucleic acid    |  Disinfectant<br /> Tissue specimen storage<br /> Embalming<br /> Sterilization of medical equipment<br /> Vaccine component for sterility    |
|   *Peroxygens*    |
|  Hydrogen peroxide<br /> Peracetic acid<br /> Benzoyl peroxide<br /> Carbamide peroxide<br /> Ozone gas    |  Oxidation and destabilization of cellular macromolecules    |  Antiseptic<br /> Disinfectant<br /> Acne medication<br /> Toothpaste ingredient    |
|   *Supercritical Gases*  |
|  Carbon dioxide  |  Penetrates cells, forms carbonic acid, lowers   intracellular pH  |  Food preservation<br /> Disinfection of medical devices<br /> Disinfection of transplant tissues  |
|   *Chemical Food Preservatives*  |
|  Sorbic acid<br /> Benzoic acid<br /> Propionic acid<br /> Potassium sorbate<br /> Sodium benzoate<br /> Calcium propionate<br /> Sulfur dioxide<br /> Nitrites  | Decrease pH and inhibit enzymatic function  | Preservation of food products  |
|   *Natural Food Preservatives* |
| Nisin<br /> Natamycin  | Inhibition of cell wall synthesis (Nisin)  |  Preservation of dairy products, meats, and beverages  |
    
