index: hide
name: Muscles of the Posterior Neck and the Back

The posterior muscles of the neck are primarily concerned with head movements, like extension. The back muscles stabilize and move the vertebral column, and are grouped according to the lengths and direction of the fascicles.

The  **splenius** muscles originate at the midline and run laterally and superiorly to their insertions. From the sides and the back of the neck, the  **splenius capitis** inserts onto the head region, and the  **splenius cervicis** extends onto the cervical region. These muscles can extend the head, laterally flex it, and rotate it ({'Figure_11_3_8 Figure 11.3.8}).


{image:'Figure_11_3_8}
        

The  **erector spinae group** forms the majority of the muscle mass of the back and it is the primary extensor of the vertebral column. It controls flexion, lateral flexion, and rotation of the vertebral column, and maintains the lumbar curve. The erector spinae comprises the iliocostalis (laterally placed) group, the longissimus (intermediately placed) group, and the spinalis (medially placed) group.

The  **iliocostalis group** includes the  **iliocostalis cervicis**, associated with the cervical region; the  **iliocostalis thoracis**, associated with the thoracic region; and the  **iliocostalis lumborum**, associated with the lumbar region. The three muscles of the  **longissimus group** are the  **longissimus capitis**, associated with the head region; the  **longissimus cervicis**, associated with the cervical region; and the  **longissimus thoracis**, associated with the thoracic region. The third group, the  **spinalis group**, comprises the  **spinalis capitis** (head region), the  **spinalis cervicis** (cervical region), and the  **spinalis thoracis** (thoracic region).

The  **transversospinales** muscles run from the transverse processes to the spinous processes of the vertebrae. Similar to the erector spinae muscles, the semispinalis muscles in this group are named for the areas of the body with which they are associated. The semispinalis muscles include the  **semispinalis capitis**, the  **semispinalis cervicis**, and the  **semispinalis thoracis**. The  **multifidus** muscle of the lumbar region helps extend and laterally flex the vertebral column.

Important in the stabilization of the vertebral column is the  **segmental muscle group**, which includes the interspinales and intertransversarii muscles. These muscles bring together the spinous and transverse processes of each consecutive vertebra. Finally, the  **scalene muscles** work together to flex, laterally flex, and rotate the head. They also contribute to deep inhalation. The scalene muscles include the  **anterior scalene** muscle (anterior to the middle scalene), the  **middle scalene** muscle (the longest, intermediate between the anterior and posterior scalenes), and the  **posterior scalene** muscle (the smallest, posterior to the middle scalene).
