index: hide
name: Muscles of the Anterior Neck

The muscles of the anterior neck assist in deglutition (swallowing) and speech by controlling the positions of the larynx (voice box), and the hyoid bone, a horseshoe-shaped bone that functions as a solid foundation on which the tongue can move. The muscles of the neck are categorized according to their position relative to the hyoid bone ({'Figure_11_3_6 Figure 11.3.6}).  **Suprahyoid muscles** are superior to it, and the  **infrahyoid muscles** are located inferiorly.


{image:'Figure_11_3_6}
        

The suprahyoid muscles raise the hyoid bone, the floor of the mouth, and the larynx during deglutition. These include the  **digastric** muscle, which has anterior and posterior bellies that work to elevate the hyoid bone and larynx when one swallows; it also depresses the mandible. The  **stylohyoid** muscle moves the hyoid bone posteriorly, elevating the larynx, and the  **mylohyoid** muscle lifts it and helps press the tongue to the top of the mouth. The  **geniohyoid** depresses the mandible in addition to raising and pulling the hyoid bone anteriorly.

The strap-like infrahyoid muscles generally depress the hyoid bone and control the position of the larynx. The  **omohyoid** muscle, which has superior and inferior bellies, depresses the hyoid bone in conjunction with the  **sternohyoid** and  **thyrohyoid** muscles. The thyrohyoid muscle also elevates the larynx’s thyroid cartilage, whereas the  **sternothyroid** depresses it to create different tones of voice.
