index: hide
name: The Aufbau Principle

To determine the electron configuration for any particular atom, we can “build” the structures in the order of atomic numbers. Beginning with hydrogen, and continuing across the periods of the periodic table, we add one proton at a time to the nucleus and one electron to the proper subshell until we have described the electron configurations of all the elements. This procedure is called the  **Aufbau principle**, from the German word  *Aufbau* (“to build up”). Each added electron occupies the subshell of lowest energy available (in the order shown in {'Figure_6_4_eLeveldiag Figure 6.4.eLeveldiag}), subject to the limitations imposed by the allowed quantum numbers according to the Pauli exclusion principle. Electrons enter higher-energy subshells only after lower-energy subshells have been filled to capacity. {'Figure_6_4_Efillorder Figure 6.4.Efillorder} illustrates the traditional way to remember the filling order for atomic orbitals. Since the arrangement of the periodic table is based on the electron configurations, {'Figure_6_4_Econtable Figure 6.4.Econtable} provides an alternative method for determining the electron configuration. The filling order simply begins at hydrogen and includes each subshell as you proceed in increasing  *Z* order. For example, after filling the 3 *p* block up to Ar, we see the orbital will be 4s (K, Ca), followed by the 3 *d* orbitals.


{image:'Figure_6_4_Efillorder}
        


{image:'Figure_6_4_Econtable}
        

We will now construct the ground-state electron configuration and orbital diagram for a selection of atoms in the first and second periods of the periodic table.  **Orbital diagrams** are pictorial representations of the electron configuration, showing the individual orbitals and the pairing arrangement of electrons. We start with a single hydrogen atom (atomic number 1), which consists of one proton and one electron. Referring to {'Figure_6_4_Efillorder Figure 6.4.Efillorder} or {'Figure_6_4_Econtable Figure 6.4.Econtable}, we would expect to find the electron in the 1 *s* orbital. By convention, the <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><msub><mi>m</mi><mi>s</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo>+</mo><mfrac><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mfrac></mrow></math> value is usually filled first. The electron configuration and the orbital diagram are:


{image:'CNX_Chem_6_4_Hydrog1_img}
        

Following hydrogen is the noble gas helium, which has an atomic number of 2. The helium atom contains two protons and two electrons. The first electron has the same four quantum numbers as the hydrogen atom electron ( *n* = 1,  *l* = 0,  *ml* = 0, <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><msub><mi>m</mi><mi>s</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo>+</mo><mfrac><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mfrac></mrow></math>). The second electron also goes into the 1 *s* orbital and fills that orbital. The second electron has the same  *n*,  *l*, and  *ml* quantum numbers, but must have the opposite spin quantum number, <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><msub><mi>m</mi><mi>s</mi></msub><mo>=</mo><mo>−</mo><mfrac><mn>1</mn><mn>2</mn></mfrac><mo>.</mo></mrow></math> This is in accord with the Pauli exclusion principle: No two electrons in the same atom can have the same set of four quantum numbers. For orbital diagrams, this means two arrows go in each box (representing two electrons in each orbital) and the arrows must point in opposite directions (representing paired spins). The electron configuration and orbital diagram of helium are:


{image:'CNX_Chem_6_4_Helium1_img}
        

The  *n* = 1 shell is completely filled in a helium atom.

The next atom is the alkali metal lithium with an atomic number of 3. The first two electrons in lithium fill the 1 *s* orbital and have the same sets of four quantum numbers as the two electrons in helium. The remaining electron must occupy the orbital of next lowest energy, the 2 *s* orbital ({'Figure_6_4_Efillorder Figure 6.4.Efillorder} or {'Figure_6_4_Econtable Figure 6.4.Econtable}). Thus, the electron configuration and orbital diagram of lithium are:


{image:'CNX_Chem_6_4_Lithium12_img}
        

An atom of the alkaline earth metal beryllium, with an atomic number of 4, contains four protons in the nucleus and four electrons surrounding the nucleus. The fourth electron fills the remaining space in the 2 *s* orbital.


{image:'CNX_Chem_6_4_Beryll12_img}
        

An atom of boron (atomic number 5) contains five electrons. The  *n* = 1 shell is filled with two electrons and three electrons will occupy the  *n* = 2 shell. Because any  *s* subshell can contain only two electrons, the fifth electron must occupy the next energy level, which will be a 2 *p* orbital. There are three degenerate 2 *p* orbitals ( *ml* = −1, 0, +1) and the electron can occupy any one of these  *p* orbitals. When drawing orbital diagrams, we include empty boxes to depict any empty orbitals in the same subshell that we are filling.


{image:'CNX_Chem_6_4_Boron122_img}
        

Carbon (atomic number 6) has six electrons. Four of them fill the 1 *s* and 2 *s* orbitals. The remaining two electrons occupy the 2 *p* subshell. We now have a choice of filling one of the 2 *p* orbitals and pairing the electrons or of leaving the electrons unpaired in two different, but degenerate,  *p* orbitals. The orbitals are filled as described by  **Hund’s rule**: the lowest-energy configuration for an atom with electrons within a set of degenerate orbitals is that having the maximum number of unpaired electrons. Thus, the two electrons in the carbon 2 *p* orbitals have identical  *n*,  *l*, and  *ms* quantum numbers and differ in their  *ml* quantum number (in accord with the Pauli exclusion principle). The electron configuration and orbital diagram for carbon are:


{image:'CNX_Chem_6_4_Carbon122_img}
        

Nitrogen (atomic number 7) fills the 1 *s* and 2 *s* subshells and has one electron in each of the three 2 *p* orbitals, in accordance with Hund’s rule. These three electrons have unpaired spins. Oxygen (atomic number 8) has a pair of electrons in any one of the 2 *p* orbitals (the electrons have opposite spins) and a single electron in each of the other two. Fluorine (atomic number 9) has only one 2 *p* orbital containing an unpaired electron. All of the electrons in the noble gas neon (atomic number 10) are paired, and all of the orbitals in the  *n* = 1 and the  *n* = 2 shells are filled. The electron configurations and orbital diagrams of these four elements are:


{image:'CNX_Chem_6_4_NOFNe_img}
        

The alkali metal sodium (atomic number 11) has one more electron than the neon atom. This electron must go into the lowest-energy subshell available, the 3 *s* orbital, giving a 1 *s*<sup>2</sup>2 *s*<sup>2</sup>2 *p*<sup>6</sup>3 *s*<sup>1</sup> configuration. The electrons occupying the outermost shell orbital(s) (highest value of  *n*) are called  **valence electrons**, and those occupying the inner shell orbitals are called  **core electrons** ({'Figure_6_4_Valence Figure 6.4.Valence}). Since the core electron shells correspond to noble gas electron configurations, we can abbreviate electron configurations by writing the noble gas that matches the core electron configuration, along with the valence electrons in a condensed format. For our sodium example, the symbol [Ne] represents core electrons, (1 *s*<sup>2</sup>2 *s*<sup>2</sup>2 *p*<sup>6</sup>) and our abbreviated or condensed configuration is [Ne]3 *s*<sup>1</sup>.


{image:'Figure_6_4_Valence}
        

Similarly, the abbreviated configuration of lithium can be represented as [He]2 *s*<sup>1</sup>, where [He] represents the configuration of the helium atom, which is identical to that of the filled inner shell of lithium. Writing the configurations in this way emphasizes the similarity of the configurations of lithium and sodium. Both atoms, which are in the alkali metal family, have only one electron in a valence  *s* subshell outside a filled set of inner shells.

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mtable columnalign="left"><mtr/><mtr><mtd><mtext>Li:</mtext><mspace width="0.2em"/><mrow><mo>[</mo> <mrow><mtext>He</mtext></mrow> <mo>]</mo></mrow><mn>2</mn><msup><mi>s</mi><mn>1</mn></msup></mtd></mtr><mtr><mtd><mtext>Na:</mtext><mspace width="0.2em"/><mrow><mo>[</mo> <mrow><mtext>Ne</mtext></mrow> <mo>]</mo></mrow><mn>3</mn><msup><mi>s</mi><mn>1</mn></msup></mtd></mtr></mtable></math>

The alkaline earth metal magnesium (atomic number 12), with its 12 electrons in a [Ne]3 *s*<sup>2</sup> configuration, is analogous to its family member beryllium, [He]2 *s*<sup>2</sup>. Both atoms have a filled  *s* subshell outside their filled inner shells. Aluminum (atomic number 13), with 13 electrons and the electron configuration [Ne]3 *s*<sup>2</sup>3 *p*<sup>1</sup>, is analogous to its family member boron, [He]2 *s*<sup>2</sup>2 *p*<sup>1</sup>.

The electron configurations of silicon (14 electrons), phosphorus (15 electrons), sulfur (16 electrons), chlorine (17 electrons), and argon (18 electrons) are analogous in the electron configurations of their outer shells to their corresponding family members carbon, nitrogen, oxygen, fluorine, and neon, respectively, except that the principal quantum number of the outer shell of the heavier elements has increased by one to  *n* = 3. {'Figure_6_4_Ptableconf Figure 6.4.Ptableconf} shows the lowest energy, or ground-state, electron configuration for these elements as well as that for atoms of each of the known elements.


{image:'Figure_6_4_Ptableconf}
        

When we come to the next element in the periodic table, the alkali metal potassium (atomic number 19), we might expect that we would begin to add electrons to the 3 *d* subshell. However, all available chemical and physical evidence indicates that potassium is like lithium and sodium, and that the next electron is not added to the 3 *d* level but is, instead, added to the 4 *s* level ({'Figure_6_4_Ptableconf Figure 6.4.Ptableconf}). As discussed previously, the 3 *d* orbital with no radial nodes is higher in energy because it is less penetrating and more shielded from the nucleus than the 4 *s*, which has three radial nodes. Thus, potassium has an electron configuration of [Ar]4 *s*<sup>1</sup>. Hence, potassium corresponds to Li and Na in its valence shell configuration. The next electron is added to complete the 4 *s* subshell and calcium has an electron configuration of [Ar]4 *s*<sup>2</sup>. This gives calcium an outer-shell electron configuration corresponding to that of beryllium and magnesium. **

Beginning with the transition metal scandium (atomic number 21), additional electrons are added successively to the 3 *d* subshell. This subshell is filled to its capacity with 10 electrons (remember that for  *l* = 2 [ *d* orbitals], there are 2 *l* + 1 = 5 values of  *ml*, meaning that there are five  *d* orbitals that have a combined capacity of 10 electrons). The 4 *p* subshell fills next. Note that for three series of elements, scandium (Sc) through copper (Cu), yttrium (Y) through silver (Ag), and lutetium (Lu) through gold (Au), a total of 10  *d* electrons are successively added to the ( *n* – 1) shell next to the  *n* shell to bring that ( *n* – 1) shell from 8 to 18 electrons. For two series, lanthanum (La) through lutetium (Lu) and actinium (Ac) through lawrencium (Lr), 14  *f* electrons ( *l* = 3, 2 *l* + 1 = 7  *ml* values; thus, seven orbitals with a combined capacity of 14 electrons) are successively added to the ( *n* – 2) shell to bring that shell from 18 electrons to a total of 32 electrons.

The periodic table can be a powerful tool in predicting the electron configuration of an element. However, we do find exceptions to the order of filling of orbitals that are shown in {'Figure_6_4_Efillorder Figure 6.4.Efillorder} or {'Figure_6_4_Econtable Figure 6.4.Econtable}. For instance, the electron configurations (shown in {'Figure_6_4_Ptableconf Figure 6.4.Ptableconf}) of the transition metals chromium (Cr; atomic number 24) and copper (Cu; atomic number 29), among others, are not those we would expect. In general, such exceptions involve subshells with very similar energy, and small effects can lead to changes in the order of filling.

In the case of Cr and Cu, we find that half-filled and completely filled subshells apparently represent conditions of preferred stability. This stability is such that an electron shifts from the 4 *s* into the 3 *d* orbital to gain the extra stability of a half-filled 3 *d* subshell (in Cr) or a filled 3 *d* subshell (in Cu). Other exceptions also occur. For example, niobium (Nb, atomic number 41) is predicted to have the electron configuration [Kr]5 *s*<sup>2</sup>4 *d*<sup>3</sup>. Experimentally, we observe that its ground-state electron configuration is actually [Kr]5 *s*<sup>1</sup>4 *d*<sup>4</sup>. We can rationalize this observation by saying that the electron–electron repulsions experienced by pairing the electrons in the 5 *s* orbital are larger than the gap in energy between the 5 *s* and 4 *d* orbitals. There is no simple method to predict the exceptions for atoms where the magnitude of the repulsions between electrons is greater than the small differences in energy between subshells.
