index: hide
name: Predicting Precipitation

The equation that describes the equilibrium between solid calcium carbonate and its solvated ions is:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mtable><mtr><mtd><msub><mrow><mtext>CaCO</mtext></mrow><mn>3</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>s</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo stretchy="false">⇌</mo><msup><mrow><mtext>Ca</mtext></mrow><mtext>2+</mtext></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>a</mi><mi>q</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>+</mo><msub><mrow><mtext>CO</mtext></mrow><mn>3</mn></msub><msup><mtext>2−</mtext></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>a</mi><mi>q</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mtd><mtd/><mtd columnalign="right"><msub><mi>K</mi><mrow><mi>s</mi><mi>p</mi></mrow></msub><mo>=</mo><mrow><mo stretchy="false">[</mo><mrow><msup><mrow><mtext>Ca</mtext></mrow><mrow><mn>2</mn><mo>+</mo></mrow></msup></mrow><mo stretchy="false">]</mo></mrow><mrow><mo stretchy="false">[</mo><mrow><msub><mrow><mtext>CO</mtext></mrow><mn>3</mn></msub><msup><mrow/><mrow><mn>2</mn><mo>−</mo></mrow></msup></mrow><mo stretchy="false">]</mo></mrow><mo>=</mo><mn>8.7</mn><mspace width="0.2em"/><mo>×</mo><mspace width="0.2em"/><msup><mrow><mn>10</mn></mrow><mrow><mo>−</mo><mn>9</mn></mrow></msup></mtd></mtr></mtable></mrow></math>

It is important to realize that this equilibrium is established in any aqueous solution containing Ca<sup>2+</sup> and CO<sub>3</sub><sup>2–</sup> ions, not just in a solution formed by saturating water with calcium carbonate. Consider, for example, mixing aqueous solutions of the soluble compounds sodium carbonate and calcium nitrate. If the concentrations of calcium and carbonate ions in the mixture do not yield a reaction quotient,  *Qsp*, that exceeds the solubility product,  *K*<sub>sp</sub>, then no precipitation will occur. If the ion concentrations yield a reaction quotient greater than the solubility product, then precipitation will occur, lowering those concentrations until equilibrium is established ( *Qsp* =  *K*<sub>sp</sub>). The comparison of  *Qsp* to  *K*<sub>sp</sub> to predict precipitation is an example of the general approach to predicting the direction of a reaction first introduced in the chapter on equilibrium. For the specific case of solubility equilibria:

 *Qsp* <  *K*<sub>sp</sub>: the reaction proceeds in the forward direction (solution is not saturated; no precipitation observed)

 *Qsp* >  *K*<sub>sp</sub>: the reaction proceeds in the reverse direction (solution is supersaturated; precipitation will occur)

This predictive strategy and related calculations are demonstrated in the next few example exercises.

In solutions containing two or more ions that may form insoluble compounds with the same counter ion, an experimental strategy called  **selective precipitation** may be used to remove individual ions from solution. By increasing the counter ion concentration in a controlled manner, ions in solution may be precipitated individually, assuming their compound solubilities are adequately different. In solutions with equal concentrations of target ions, the ion forming the least soluble compound will precipitate first (at the lowest concentration of counter ion), with the other ions subsequently precipitating as their compound’s solubilities are reached. As an illustration of this technique, the next example exercise describes separation of a two halide ions via precipitation of one as a silver salt.
