index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 1.5.2
title: 1.5.2 - Capabilities in Global Climate Modelling

Several developments have especially pushed the capabilities in modelling forward over recent years (see {'Figure_1_13 Figure 1.13} and a more detailed discussion in Chapters {Chapters.6}, {Chapters.7} and {Chapters.9}).

{image:'Figure_1_13}

There has been a continuing increase in horizontal and vertical {Glossary.*Resolution resolution}. This is especially seen in how the ocean grids have been refined, and sophisticated grids are now used in the ocean and {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} models making optimal use of parallel computer architectures. More models with higher resolution are available for more regions. {'Figure_1_14 Figure 1.14}a and 1.14b show the large effect on surface representation from a horizontal grid spacing of 87.5 km (higher resolution than most current global models and similar to that used in today’s highly resolved models) to a grid spacing of 30.0 km (similar to the current {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} models).

{image:'Figure_1_14}

Representations of {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system} processes are much more extensive and improved, particularly for the radiation and the {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} cloud interactions and for the treatment of the {Glossary.*Cryosphere cryosphere}. The representation of the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} was added to a larger number of models and has been improved since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}. A high-resolution {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} is now included in many models. Other ongoing process development in {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} includes the enhanced representation of nitrogen effects on the carbon cycle. As new processes or treatments are added to the models, they are also evaluated and tested relative to available observations (see {Chapters.9 Chapter 9} for more detailed discussion).

{Glossary.*Ensemble Ensemble} techniques (multiple calculations to increase the statistical sample, to account for natural variability, and to account for uncertainty in model formulations) are being used more frequently, with larger samples and with different methods to generate the samples (different models, different physics, different initial conditions). Coordinated projects have been set up to generate and distribute large samples (ENSEMBLES, climateprediction.net, Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Intercomparison).

The model comparisons with observations have pushed the analysis and development of the models. CMIP5, an important input to the AR5, has produced a multi-model data set that is designed to advance our understanding of {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} and climate change. Building on previous CMIP efforts, such as the CMIP3 model analysis reported in AR4, CMIP5 includes ‘long-term’ simulations of 20th century climate and {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} for the 21st century and beyond. See Chapters {Chapters.9}, {Chapters.10}, {Chapters.11} and {Chapters.12} for more details on the results derived from the CMIP5 archive.

Since AR4, the incorporation of ‘long-term’ {Glossary.*Paleoclimate paleoclimate} simulations in the CMIP5 framework has allowed incorporation of information from paleoclimate data to inform projections. Within {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} associated with reconstructions of {Topics.*Past_Climate past climate} variables from {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} records and {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}, paleoclimate information from the Mid {Glossary.*Holocene Holocene}, {Glossary.*Last_Glacial_Maximum Last Glacial Maximum} and Last Millennium have been used to test the ability of models to simulate realistically the magnitude and largescale patterns of past changes ({Chapters.5.5_3 Section 5.3}, Box 5.1 and 9.4).

The capabilities of {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} continue to be enhanced. For example, there are currently extensive efforts towards developing advanced treatments for the processes affecting {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} dynamics. Other enhancements are being aimed at land surface hydrology, and the effects of agriculture and urban environments.

As part of the process of getting model analyses for a range of alternative assumptions about how the future may unfold, scenarios for future {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of important gases and aerosols have been generated for the IPCC assessments (e.g., see the {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} used in {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} and AR4). The {Topics.*Scenarios emissions scenarios} represent various development pathways based on well-defined assumptions. The scenarios are used to calculate future changes in climate, and are then archived in the Climate {Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project (e.g., CMIP3 for AR4; CMIP5 for AR5). For CMIP5, four new scenarios, referred to as Representative Concentration Pathways ({Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs}) were developed ({Chapters.12.12_3 Section 12.3}; {cite.1.'Moss_et_al_2010}). See {Box_1_1 Box 1.1} for a more thorough discussion of the RCP scenarios. Because results from both CMIP3 and CMIP5 will be presented in the later chapters (e.g., Chapters {Chapters.8}, {Chapters.9}, {Chapters.11} and {Chapters.12}), it is worthwhile considering the differences and similarities between the SRES and the RCP scenarios. {'Figure_1_15 Figure 1.15}, acting as a prelude to the discussion in {Box_1_1 Box 1.1}, shows that the RF for several of the SRES and RCP scenarios are similar over time and thus should provide results that can be used to compare climate modelling studies.

{image:'Figure_1_15}
