index: hide
name: Prokaryotic versus Eukaryotic Gene Expression

To understand how gene expression is regulated, we must first understand how a gene becomes a functional protein in a cell. The process occurs in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, just in slightly different fashions.

Because prokaryotic organisms lack a cell nucleus, the processes of transcription and translation occur almost simultaneously. When the protein is no longer needed, transcription stops. As a result, the primary method to control what type and how much protein is expressed in a prokaryotic cell is through the regulation of DNA transcription into RNA. All the subsequent steps happen automatically. When more protein is required, more transcription occurs. Therefore, in prokaryotic cells, the control of gene expression is almost entirely at the transcriptional level.

 The first example of such control was discovered using  *E*.  *coli* in the 1950s and 1960s by French researchers and is called the  *lac* operon. The  *lac* operon is a stretch of DNA with three adjacent genes that code for proteins that participate in the absorption and metabolism of lactose, a food source for  *E*.  *coli*. When lactose is not present in the bacterium’s environment, the  *lac* genes are transcribed in small amounts. When lactose is present, the genes are transcribed and the bacterium is able to use the lactose as a food source. The operon also contains a promoter sequence to which the RNA polymerase binds to begin transcription; between the promoter and the three genes is a region called the operator. When there is no lactose present, a protein known as a repressor binds to the operator and prevents RNA polymerase from binding to the promoter, except in rare cases. Thus very little of the protein products of the three genes is made. When lactose is present, an end product of lactose metabolism binds to the repressor protein and prevents it from binding to the operator. This allows RNA polymerase to bind to the promoter and freely transcribe the three genes, allowing the organism to metabolize the lactose.

Eukaryotic cells, in contrast, have intracellular organelles and are much more complex. Recall that in eukaryotic cells, the DNA is contained inside the cell’s nucleus and it is transcribed into mRNA there. The newly synthesized mRNA is then transported out of the nucleus into the cytoplasm, where ribosomes translate the mRNA into protein. The processes of transcription and translation are physically separated by the nuclear membrane; transcription occurs only within the nucleus, and translation only occurs outside the nucleus in the cytoplasm. The regulation of gene expression can occur at all stages of the process ({'Figure_9_5_1 Figure 9.5.1}). Regulation may occur when the DNA is uncoiled and loosened from nucleosomes to bind transcription factors ( **epigenetic** level), when the RNA is transcribed (transcriptional level), when RNA is processed and exported to the cytoplasm after it is transcribed ( **post-transcriptional** level), when the RNA is translated into protein (translational level), or after the protein has been made ( **post-translational** level).


{image:'Figure_9_5_1}
        

The differences in the regulation of gene expression between prokaryotes and eukaryotes are summarized in .


****

| Prokaryotic organisms | Eukaryotic organisms |
|:-:|:-:|
| Lack nucleus | Contain nucleus |
| RNA transcription and protein translation occur almost simultaneously |  RNA transcription occurs prior to protein translation, and it takes place in the nucleus. RNA translation to protein occurs in the cytoplasm. RNA post-processing includes addition of a 5' cap, poly-A tail, and excision of introns and splicing of exons.  |
| Gene expression is regulated primarily at the transcriptional level | Gene expression is regulated at many levels (epigenetic, transcriptional, post-transcriptional, translational, and post-translational) |
    
