index: hide
name: The Basics of Organic Nomenclature: Naming Alkanes

The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( **IUPAC**) has devised a system of nomenclature that begins with the names of the alkanes and can be adjusted from there to account for more complicated structures. The nomenclature for alkanes is based on two rules:

  1. To name an alkane, first identify the longest chain of carbon atoms in its structure. A two-carbon chain is called ethane; a three-carbon chain, propane; and a four-carbon chain, butane. Longer chains are named as follows: pentane (five-carbon chain), hexane (6), heptane (7), octane (8), nonane (9), and decane (10). These prefixes can be seen in the names of the alkanes described in .
  2. Add prefixes to the name of the longest chain to indicate the positions and names of  **substituents**. Substituents are branches or functional groups that replace hydrogen atoms on a chain. The position of a substituent or branch is identified by the number of the carbon atom it is bonded to in the chain. We number the carbon atoms in the chain by counting from the end of the chain nearest the substituents. Multiple substituents are named individually and placed in alphabetical order at the front of the name.


{image:'CNX_Chem_20_1_substitu_img}
        

When more than one substituent is present, either on the same carbon atom or on different carbon atoms, the substituents are listed alphabetically. Because the carbon atom numbering begins at the end closest to a substituent, the longest chain of carbon atoms is numbered in such a way as to produce the lowest number for the substituents. The ending  *-o* replaces  *-ide* at the end of the name of an electronegative substituent (in ionic compounds, the negatively charged ion ends with  *-ide* like chloride; in organic compounds, such atoms are treated as substituents and the  *-o* ending is used). The number of substituents of the same type is indicated by the prefixes  *di-* (two),  *tri-* (three),  *tetra-* (four), and so on (for example,  *difluoro-* indicates two fluoride substituents).

We call a substituent that contains one less hydrogen than the corresponding alkane an alkyl group. The name of an  **alkyl group** is obtained by dropping the suffix  *-ane* of the alkane name and adding  *-yl*:


{image:'CNX_Chem_20_1_alkyl_img}
        

The open bonds in the methyl and ethyl groups indicate that these alkyl groups are bonded to another atom.

Some hydrocarbons can form more than one type of alkyl group when the hydrogen atoms that would be removed have different “environments” in the molecule. This diversity of possible alkyl groups can be identified in the following way: The four hydrogen atoms in a methane molecule are equivalent; they all have the same environment. They are equivalent because each is bonded to a carbon atom (the same carbon atom) that is bonded to three hydrogen atoms. (It may be easier to see the equivalency in the ball and stick models in {'Figure_20_1_alkanes Figure 20.1.alkanes}. Removal of any one of the four hydrogen atoms from methane forms a methyl group. Likewise, the six hydrogen atoms in ethane are equivalent ({'Figure_20_1_alkanes Figure 20.1.alkanes}) and removing any one of these hydrogen atoms produces an ethyl group. Each of the six hydrogen atoms is bonded to a carbon atom that is bonded to two other hydrogen atoms and a carbon atom. However, in both propane and 2–methylpropane, there are hydrogen atoms in two different environments, distinguished by the adjacent atoms or groups of atoms:


{image:'CNX_Chem_20_1_propane_img}
        

Each of the six equivalent hydrogen atoms of the first type in propane and each of the nine equivalent hydrogen atoms of that type in 2-methylpropane (all shown in black) are bonded to a carbon atom that is bonded to only one other carbon atom. The two purple hydrogen atoms in propane are of a second type. They differ from the six hydrogen atoms of the first type in that they are bonded to a carbon atom bonded to two other carbon atoms. The green hydrogen atom in 2-methylpropane differs from the other nine hydrogen atoms in that molecule and from the purple hydrogen atoms in propane. The green hydrogen atom in 2-methylpropane is bonded to a carbon atom bonded to three other carbon atoms. Two different alkyl groups can be formed from each of these molecules, depending on which hydrogen atom is removed. The names and structures of these and several other alkyl groups are listed in {'Figure_20_1_alkyls Figure 20.1.alkyls}.


{image:'Figure_20_1_alkyls}
        

Note that alkyl groups do not exist as stable independent entities. They are always a part of some larger molecule. The location of an alkyl group on a hydrocarbon chain is indicated in the same way as any other substituent:


{image:'CNX_Chem_20_1_alklnm_img}
        

Alkanes are relatively stable molecules, but heat or light will activate reactions that involve the breaking of C–H or C–C single bonds. Combustion is one such reaction:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><msub><mrow><mtext>CH</mtext></mrow><mn>4</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>g</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>+</mo><mn>2</mn><msub><mtext>O</mtext><mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>g</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mspace width="0.2em"/><mo stretchy="false">⟶</mo><mspace width="0.2em"/><msub><mrow><mtext>CO</mtext></mrow><mn>2</mn></msub><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mi>g</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mo>+</mo><mn>2</mn><msub><mtext>H</mtext><mn>2</mn></msub><mtext>O</mtext><mrow><mo>(</mo><mtext>g</mtext><mo>)</mo></mrow></mrow></math>

Alkanes burn in the presence of oxygen, a highly exothermic oxidation-reduction reaction that produces carbon dioxide and water. As a consequence, alkanes are excellent fuels. For example, methane, CH<sub>4</sub>, is the principal component of natural gas. Butane, C<sub>4</sub>H<sub>10</sub>, used in camping stoves and lighters is an alkane. Gasoline is a liquid mixture of continuous- and branched-chain alkanes, each containing from five to nine carbon atoms, plus various additives to improve its performance as a fuel. Kerosene, diesel oil, and fuel oil are primarily mixtures of alkanes with higher molecular masses. The main source of these liquid alkane fuels is crude oil, a complex mixture that is separated by fractional distillation. Fractional distillation takes advantage of differences in the boiling points of the components of the mixture (see {'Figure_20_1_FracDistil Figure 20.1.FracDistil}). You may recall that boiling point is a function of intermolecular interactions, which was discussed in the chapter on solutions and colloids.


{image:'Figure_20_1_FracDistil}
        

In a  **substitution reaction**, another typical reaction of alkanes, one or more of the alkane’s hydrogen atoms is replaced with a different atom or group of atoms. No carbon-carbon bonds are broken in these reactions, and the hybridization of the carbon atoms does not change. For example, the reaction between ethane and molecular chlorine depicted here is a substitution reaction:


{image:'CNX_Chem_20_1_ethylChlor_img}
        

The C–Cl portion of the chloroethane molecule is an example of a  **functional group**, the part or moiety of a molecule that imparts a specific chemical reactivity. The types of functional groups present in an organic molecule are major determinants of its chemical properties and are used as a means of classifying organic compounds as detailed in the remaining sections of this chapter.
