index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.5.4
title: 13.5.4 - Long-term Scenarios

Less information is available on climate change beyond the year 2100 than there is up to the year 2100. However, the ocean and ice sheets will continue to respond to changes in {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} on multi-centennial to multi-millennial time scales. For the period up to the year 2500, available physical model {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} discussed in {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_1 Section 13.4.1}-4 are combined into an assessment of future {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} rise. Paleo simulations are combined with paleo data to estimate the sea level commitment on a multi-millennial time scale beyond 2500 for different levels of sustained increases in {Topics.*Surface_Temperature global mean temperature}.

The {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs}, as applied in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12} and Sections {Chapters.13.13_4 13.4} and {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_1 13.5.1}, are defined up to the year 2100. Their extension up to the year 2300 is used to project long-term climate change ({Chapters.12.12_3.12_3_1.12_3_1_3 Section 12.3.1.3}) ({cite.13.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011}), but they are not directly derived from integrated assessment models. In simulations that are reported here up to the year 2500, the RF has generally been kept constant at the 2300 level except for {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6}, in which the forcing continues to decline at the 2300 rate. Some model simulations of ice sheets and ocean warming assessed here have used {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} different from the RCP scenarios. Because of the limited number of available simulations, sea level projections beyond the year 2100 have thus been grouped into three categories according to their GHG concentration in the 22nd century: low scenarios in which atmospheric GHG concentrations peak and decline and do not exceed values that are equivalent to 500 ppm {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}, medium scenarios with concentrations between 500 and 700 ppm CO2-eq, and high scenarios above 700 ppm. As a consequence, the {Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} shown in {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13} and {'Table_13_8 Table 13.8} combines different scenarios and is not merely due to different model physics. The low scenarios include RCP2.6, SRES B1 and scenarios with 0.5 and 2% yr–1 increases in CO2 followed by no {Topics.*Emissions emissions} after 450 ppm has been reached, and the commitment scenarios, CC, in {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} which stabilize CO2 at present-day levels. In a number of the low scenarios, the global mean temperature peaks during the 21st century and declines thereafter. These peak-and-decline scenarios include RCP2.6 as well as all scenarios with no GHG emissions after a specified year. Even in these scenarios sea level continues to rise up to the year 2500 in accordance with the multi-millennial sea level commitment of about 2 m °C–1 as discussed in {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_4.13_5_4_2 Section 13.5.4.2}. The medium scenarios include RCP4.5 as well as scenarios with 1% yr–1 increase in CO2 up to 560 ppm and SRES-B1 and SRES-A1B. The high scenarios include RCP6.0 and {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} as well as 1120 ppm scenarios and SRES A2. Also included are scenarios with 0.5 and 2% increase in CO2 and a SRES A2 scenario with zero emissions after 1200 and 1120 ppm have been reached, respectively.

{image:'Figure_13_13}

{table:'Table_13_8}
