index: hide
name: The Cerebrum

The iconic gray mantle of the human brain, which appears to make up most of the mass of the brain, is the  **cerebrum** ({'Figure_13_2_1 Figure 13.2.1}). The wrinkled portion is the  **cerebral cortex**, and the rest of the structure is beneath that outer covering. There is a large separation between the two sides of the cerebrum called the  **longitudinal fissure**. It separates the cerebrum into two distinct halves, a right and left  **cerebral hemisphere**. Deep within the cerebrum, the white matter of the  **corpus callosum** provides the major pathway for communication between the two hemispheres of the cerebral cortex.


{image:'Figure_13_2_1}
        

Many of the higher neurological functions, such as memory, emotion, and consciousness, are the result of cerebral function. The complexity of the cerebrum is different across vertebrate species. The cerebrum of the most primitive vertebrates is not much more than the connection for the sense of smell. In mammals, the cerebrum comprises the outer gray matter that is the cortex (from the Latin word meaning “bark of a tree”) and several deep nuclei that belong to three important functional groups. The  **basal nuclei** are responsible for cognitive processing, the most important function being that associated with planning movements. The  **basal forebrain** contains nuclei that are important in learning and memory. The  **limbic cortex** is the region of the cerebral cortex that is part of the  **limbic system**, a collection of structures involved in emotion, memory, and behavior.

## Cerebral Cortex

The cerebrum is covered by a continuous layer of gray matter that wraps around either side of the forebrain—the cerebral cortex. This thin, extensive region of wrinkled gray matter is responsible for the higher functions of the nervous system. A  **gyrus** (plural = gyri) is the ridge of one of those wrinkles, and a  **sulcus** (plural = sulci) is the groove between two gyri. The pattern of these folds of tissue indicates specific regions of the cerebral cortex.

The head is limited by the size of the birth canal, and the brain must fit inside the cranial cavity of the skull. Extensive folding in the cerebral cortex enables more gray matter to fit into this limited space. If the gray matter of the cortex were peeled off of the cerebrum and laid out flat, its surface area would be roughly equal to one square meter.

The folding of the cortex maximizes the amount of gray matter in the cranial cavity. During embryonic development, as the telencephalon expands within the skull, the brain goes through a regular course of growth that results in everyone’s brain having a similar pattern of folds. The surface of the brain can be mapped on the basis of the locations of large gyri and sulci. Using these landmarks, the cortex can be separated into four major regions, or lobes ({'Figure_13_2_2 Figure 13.2.2}). The  **lateral sulcus** that separates the  **temporal lobe** from the other regions is one such landmark. Superior to the lateral sulcus are the  **parietal lobe** and  **frontal lobe**, which are separated from each other by the  **central sulcus**. The posterior region of the cortex is the  **occipital lobe**, which has no obvious anatomical border between it and the parietal or temporal lobes on the lateral surface of the brain. From the medial surface, an obvious landmark separating the parietal and occipital lobes is called the  **parieto-occipital sulcus**. The fact that there is no obvious anatomical border between these lobes is consistent with the functions of these regions being interrelated.


{image:'Figure_13_2_2}
        

Different regions of the cerebral cortex can be associated with particular functions, a concept known as localization of function. In the early 1900s, a German neuroscientist named Korbinian Brodmann performed an extensive study of the microscopic anatomy—the cytoarchitecture—of the cerebral cortex and divided the cortex into 52 separate regions on the basis of the histology of the cortex. His work resulted in a system of classification known as  **Brodmann’s areas**, which is still used today to describe the anatomical distinctions within the cortex ({'Figure_13_2_3 Figure 13.2.3}). The results from Brodmann’s work on the anatomy align very well with the functional differences within the cortex. Areas 17 and 18 in the occipital lobe are responsible for primary visual perception. That visual information is complex, so it is processed in the temporal and parietal lobes as well.

The temporal lobe is associated with primary auditory sensation, known as Brodmann’s areas 41 and 42 in the superior temporal lobe. Because regions of the temporal lobe are part of the limbic system, memory is an important function associated with that lobe. Memory is essentially a sensory function; memories are recalled sensations such as the smell of Mom’s baking or the sound of a barking dog. Even memories of movement are really the memory of sensory feedback from those movements, such as stretching muscles or the movement of the skin around a joint. Structures in the temporal lobe are responsible for establishing long-term memory, but the ultimate location of those memories is usually in the region in which the sensory perception was processed.

The main sensation associated with the parietal lobe is  **somatosensation**, meaning the general sensations associated with the body. Posterior to the central sulcus is the  **postcentral gyrus**, the primary somatosensory cortex, which is identified as Brodmann’s areas 1, 2, and 3. All of the tactile senses are processed in this area, including touch, pressure, tickle, pain, itch, and vibration, as well as more general senses of the body such as  **proprioception** and  **kinesthesia**, which are the senses of body position and movement, respectively.

Anterior to the central sulcus is the frontal lobe, which is primarily associated with motor functions. The  **precentral gyrus** is the primary motor cortex. Cells from this region of the cerebral cortex are the upper motor neurons that instruct cells in the spinal cord to move skeletal muscles. Anterior to this region are a few areas that are associated with planned movements. The  **premotor area** is responsible for thinking of a movement to be made. The  **frontal eye fields** are important in eliciting eye movements and in attending to visual stimuli.  **Broca’s area** is responsible for the production of language, or controlling movements responsible for speech; in the vast majority of people, it is located only on the left side. Anterior to these regions is the  **prefrontal lobe**, which serves cognitive functions that can be the basis of personality, short-term memory, and consciousness. The prefrontal lobotomy is an outdated mode of treatment for personality disorders (psychiatric conditions) that profoundly affected the personality of the patient.


{image:'Figure_13_2_3}
        

## Subcortical structures

Beneath the cerebral cortex are sets of nuclei known as  **subcortical nuclei** that augment cortical processes. The nuclei of the basal forebrain serve as the primary location for acetylcholine production, which modulates the overall activity of the cortex, possibly leading to greater attention to sensory stimuli. Alzheimer’s disease is associated with a loss of neurons in the basal forebrain. The  **hippocampus** and  **amygdala** are medial-lobe structures that, along with the adjacent cortex, are involved in long-term memory formation and emotional responses. The basal nuclei are a set of nuclei in the cerebrum responsible for comparing cortical processing with the general state of activity in the nervous system to influence the likelihood of movement taking place. For example, while a student is sitting in a classroom listening to a lecture, the basal nuclei will keep the urge to jump up and scream from actually happening. (The basal nuclei are also referred to as the basal ganglia, although that is potentially confusing because the term ganglia is typically used for peripheral structures.)

The major structures of the basal nuclei that control movement are the  **caudate**,  **putamen**, and  **globus pallidus**, which are located deep in the cerebrum. The caudate is a long nucleus that follows the basic C-shape of the cerebrum from the frontal lobe, through the parietal and occipital lobes, into the temporal lobe. The putamen is mostly deep in the anterior regions of the frontal and parietal lobes. Together, the caudate and putamen are called the  **striatum**. The globus pallidus is a layered nucleus that lies just medial to the putamen; they are called the lenticular nuclei because they look like curved pieces fitting together like lenses. The globus pallidus has two subdivisions, the external and internal segments, which are lateral and medial, respectively. These nuclei are depicted in a frontal section of the brain in {'Figure_13_2_4 Figure 13.2.4}.


{image:'Figure_13_2_4}
        

The basal nuclei in the cerebrum are connected with a few more nuclei in the brain stem that together act as a functional group that forms a motor pathway. Two streams of information processing take place in the basal nuclei. All input to the basal nuclei is from the cortex into the striatum ({'Figure_13_2_5 Figure 13.2.5}). The  **direct pathway** is the projection of axons from the striatum to the globus pallidus internal segment (GPi) and the  **substantia nigra pars reticulata** (SNr). The GPi/SNr then projects to the thalamus, which projects back to the cortex. The  **indirect pathway** is the projection of axons from the striatum to the globus pallidus external segment (GPe), then to the subthalamic nucleus (STN), and finally to GPi/SNr. The two streams both target the GPi/SNr, but one has a direct projection and the other goes through a few intervening nuclei. The direct pathway causes the  **disinhibition** of the thalamus (inhibition of one cell on a target cell that then inhibits the first cell), whereas the indirect pathway causes, or reinforces, the normal inhibition of the thalamus. The thalamus then can either excite the cortex (as a result of the direct pathway) or fail to excite the cortex (as a result of the indirect pathway).


{image:'Figure_13_2_5}
        

The switch between the two pathways is the  **substantia nigra pars compacta**, which projects to the striatum and releases the neurotransmitter dopamine. Dopamine receptors are either excitatory (D1-type receptors) or inhibitory (D2-type receptors). The direct pathway is activated by dopamine, and the indirect pathway is inhibited by dopamine. When the substantia nigra pars compacta is firing, it signals to the basal nuclei that the body is in an active state, and movement will be more likely. When the substantia nigra pars compacta is silent, the body is in a passive state, and movement is inhibited. To illustrate this situation, while a student is sitting listening to a lecture, the substantia nigra pars compacta would be silent and the student less likely to get up and walk around. Likewise, while the professor is lecturing, and walking around at the front of the classroom, the professor’s substantia nigra pars compacta would be active, in keeping with his or her activity level.
