index: hide
name: Reception of Sound

In mammals, sound waves are collected by the external, cartilaginous part of the ear called the  **pinna**, then travel through the auditory canal and cause vibration of the thin diaphragm called the  **tympanum** or ear drum, the innermost part of the  **outer ear** (illustrated in {'Figure_B36_4_2 Figure B36.4.2}). Interior to the tympanum is the  **middle ear**. The middle ear holds three small bones called the  **ossicles**, which transfer energy from the moving tympanum to the inner ear. The three ossicles are the  **malleus** (also known as the hammer), the  **incus** (the anvil), and  **stapes** (the stirrup). The aptly named stapes looks very much like a stirrup. The three ossicles are unique to mammals, and each plays a role in hearing. The malleus attaches at three points to the interior surface of the tympanic membrane. The incus attaches the malleus to the stapes. In humans, the stapes is not long enough to reach the tympanum. If we did not have the malleus and the incus, then the vibrations of the tympanum would never reach the inner ear. These bones also function to collect force and amplify sounds. The ear ossicles are homologous to bones in a fish mouth: the bones that support gills in fish are thought to be adapted for use in the vertebrate ear over evolutionary time. Many animals (frogs, reptiles, and birds, for example) use the stapes of the middle ear to transmit vibrations to the middle ear.


{image:'Figure_B36_4_2}
        
