index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Most ATP generated during the cellular respiration of glucose is made by  **oxidative phosphorylation**.
  * An  **electron transport system (ETS)** is composed of a series of membrane-associated protein complexes and associated mobile accessory electron carriers. The ETS is embedded in the cytoplasmic membrane of prokaryotes and the inner mitochondrial membrane of eukaryotes.
  * Each ETS complex has a different redox potential, and electrons move from electron carriers with more negative redox potential to those with more positive redox potential.
  * To carry out  **aerobic respiration**, a cell requires oxygen as the final electron acceptor. A cell also needs a complete Krebs cycle, an appropriate cytochrome oxidase, and oxygen detoxification enzymes to prevent the harmful effects of oxygen radicals produced during aerobic respiration.
  * Organisms performing  **anaerobic respiration** use alternative electron transport system carriers for the ultimate transfer of electrons to the final non-oxygen electron acceptors.
  * Microbes show great variation in the composition of their electron transport systems, which can be used for diagnostic purposes to help identify certain pathogens.
  * As electrons are passed from NADH and FADH<sub>2</sub> through an ETS, the electron loses energy. This energy is stored through the pumping of H<sup>+</sup> across the membrane, generating a  **proton motive force**.
  * The energy of this proton motive force can be harnessed by allowing hydrogen ions to diffuse back through the membrane by  **chemiosmosis** using  **ATP synthase**. As hydrogen ions diffuse through down their electrochemical gradient, components of ATP synthase spin, making ATP from ADP and P<sub>i</sub> by oxidative phosphorylation.
  * Aerobic respiration forms more ATP (a maximum of 34 ATP molecules) during oxidative phosphorylation than does anaerobic respiration (between one and 32 ATP molecules).
