index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.2.3.1
title: 11.2.3.1 - Decadal Prediction Experiments

Decadal predictions for specific variables can be made by exploiting empirical relationships based on past observations and expected physical relationships. Predictions of North Pacific Ocean temperatures have been achieved using prior wind stress observations ({cite.11.'Schneider_and_Miller_2001}). Both global and regional predictions of {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} have been made based on projected changes in {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} and the observed state of the natural variability at the start date ({cite.11.'Lean_and_Rind_2009}; Krueger and von Storch, 2011; {cite.11.'Ho_et_al_2012a}; {cite.11.'Newman_2013}). Some of these forecast systems are also used as benchmarks to compare with the dynamical systems under development. Comparisons ({cite.11.'Newman_2013 Newman (2013)} have shown that there is similarity in the temperature skill between a linear inverse method and the CMIP5 hindcasts, pointing at a similarity in their sources of skill. In the future, the combination of information from empirical and dynamical predictions might be explored to provide a unified and more skilful {Glossary.*Source source} of information.

Evidence for skilful interannual to decadal temperatures using dynamical models forced only by previous and projected changes in {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} greenhouse gases ({Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs}) and aerosols and natural variations in volcanic aerosols and solar irradiance is reported by {cite.11.'Lee_et_al_2006b Lee et al. (2006b)}, Räisänen and Ruokolainen (2006) and {cite.11.'Laepple_et_al_2008 Laepple et al. (2008)}. Some attempts to predict the 10-year climate over regions have been done using this approach, and include assessments of the role of the internal decadal variability ({cite.11.'Hoerling_et_al_2011}). To be clear, in the context of this report these studies are viewed as {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} because no attempt is made to use observational estimates for the initial conditions. Essentially, an uninitialized prediction is synonymous with a {Glossary.*Projection projection}. These projections or uninitialized predictions are referred to synonymously in the literature as ‘NoInit,’ or ‘NoAssim’, referring to the fact that no assimilated observations are used for the specification of the initial conditions.

Additional skill can be realized by initializing the models with observations in order to predict the evolution of the internally generated component and to correct the model’s response to previously imposed forcing ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Fyfe_et_al_2011}; {cite.11.'Kharin_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2012}). Again, to be clear, the assessment provided here distinguishes between predictions in which attempts are made to initialize the models with observations, and projections. See {Box_11_1 Box 11.1} and {FAQ_11_1 FAQ 11.1} for further details.

The ENSEMBLES project (van Oldenborgh et al., 2012), for example, has conducted a multi-model decadal retrospective prediction study, and the Coupled {Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project phase 5 (CMIP5) proposed a coordinated experiment that focuses on decadal, or near-term, {Glossary.*Climate_prediction climate prediction} ({cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2009b}; {cite.11.'Taylor_et_al_2012}). Prior to these initiatives, several pioneering attempts at initialized decadal prediction were made ({cite.11.'Pierce_et_al_2004}; {cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2007}; {cite.11.'Troccoli_and_Palmer_2007}; {cite.11.'Keenlyside_et_al_2008}; {cite.11.'Pohlmann_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'Mochizuki_et_al_2010}). Results from the CMIP5 coordinated experiment ({cite.11.'Taylor_et_al_2012}) are the basis for the assessment reported here.

Because the practice of decadal prediction is in its infancy, details of how to initialize the models included in the CMIP5 near-term experiment were left to the discretion of the modelling groups and are described in Meehl et al. (2013d) and {'Table_11_1 Table 11.1}. In CMIP5 experiments, volcanic {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} and {Glossary.*Solar_11_year_cycle solar cycle} variability are prescribed along the integration using observation-based values up to 2005, and assuming a climatological 11-year solar cycle and a background volcanic aerosol load in the future. These forcings are shared with CMIP5 historical runs (i.e., unintialized projections) started from pre-industrial control simulations, enabling an assessment of the impact of initialization. The specification of the volcanic aerosol load and the solar irradiance in the hindcasts gives an optimistic estimate of the forecast quality with respect to an operational prediction system, where no such future information can be used. {'Table_11_1 Table 11.1} summarizes forecast systems contributing to, and the initialization methods used in, the CMIP5 near-term experiment.

The coordinated nature of the ENSEMBLES and CMIP5 experiments also offers a good opportunity to study multi-model ensembles (Garcia-Serrano and Doblas-Reyes, 2012; van Oldenborgh et al., 2012) as a means of sampling model {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} while some modelling groups have also investigated this using perturbed parameter approaches ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2010}). The relative merit of the different approaches for decadal predictions has yet to be assessed.

When initialized with states close to the observations, models ‘drift’ towards their imperfect climatology (an estimate of the mean climate), leading to biases in the simulations that depend on the forecast time. The time scale of the drift in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} and upper ocean is, in most cases, a few years ({cite.11.'Hazeleger_et_al_2013a}). Biases can be largely removed using empirical techniques a posteriori (Garcia-Serrano and Doblas-Reyes, 2012; {cite.11.'Kharin_et_al_2012}). The bias correction or adjustment linearly corrects for {Glossary.*Model_drift model drift} (e.g., {cite.11.'Stockdale_1997}; Garcia-Serrano et al., 2012; Gangstø et al., 2013). The approach assumes that the model bias is stable over the prediction period (from 1960 onward in the CMIP5 experiment). This might not be the case if, for instance, the predicted temperature {Glossary.*Trend trend} differs from the observed trend ({cite.11.'Fyfe_et_al_2011}; {cite.11.'Kharin_et_al_2012}). {'Figure_11_2 Figure 11.2} is an illustration of the time scale of the global {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} drift, while at the same time showing the systematic error of several of the forecast systems contributing to CMIP5. It is important to note that the systematic errors illustrated here are common to both decadal prediction systems and climate-change projections. The bias adjustment itself is another important source of uncertainty in {Topics.*Climate_Predictions climate predictions} (e.g., {cite.11.'Ho_et_al_2012b}). There may be nonlinear relationships between the mean state and the anomalies, that are neglected in linear bias adjustment techniques. There are also difficulties in estimating the drift in the presence of volcanic eruptions.

It has been recognized that including as many initial states as possible in computing the drift and adjusting the bias is more desirable than a greater number of {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} members per initial state (Meehl et al., 2013d), although increasing both is desirable to obtain robust forecast quality estimates. A procedure for bias adjustment following the technique outlined above has been recommended for CMIP5 (ICPO, 2011). A suitable adjustment depends also on there being a sufficient number of hindcasts for statistical robustness (Garcia-Serrano et al., 2012; {cite.11.'Kharin_et_al_2012}).

To reduce the impact of the drift many of the early attempts at decadal prediction ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2007}; {cite.11.'Keenlyside_et_al_2008}; {cite.11.'Pohlmann_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'Mochizuki_et_al_2010}) use an approach called anomaly initialization ({cite.11.'Schneider_et_al_1999}; {cite.11.'Pierce_et_al_2004}; {cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2007}). The anomaly initialization approach attempts to circumvent model drift and the need for a time-varying bias correction. The models are initialized by adding observed anomalies to an estimate of the model mean climate. The mean model climate is subsequently subtracted from the predictions to obtain forecast anomalies. Sampling error in the estimation of the mean climatology affects the success of this approach. This is also the case for full-field initialization, although as anomaly initialisation is affected to a smaller degree by the drift, the sampling error is assumed to be smaller ({cite.11.'Hazeleger_et_al_2013a}). The relative merits of anomaly versus full initialization are being quantified ({cite.11.'Hazeleger_et_al_2013a}; {cite.11.'Magnusson_et_al_2013}; {cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2013a}), although no initialization method was found to be definitely better in terms of forecast quality. Another less widely explored alternative is dynamic bias correction in which multi-year monthly mean analysis increments are added during the integration of the ocean model ({cite.11.'Wang_et_al_2013}). {'Figure_11_2 Figure 11.2} includes predictions performed with both full and anomaly initialization systems.
