index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.2
title: 8.3.2 - Well-mixed Greenhouse Gases

{cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} assessed the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF} from 1750 to 2005 of the {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs} to be 2.63 W m–2. The four most important gases were {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}, {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}, dichlorodifluoromethane ({Glossary.*CFC CFC}-12) and {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O} in that order. {Glossary.*Halocarbons Halocarbons}, comprising CFCs, HCFCs, HFCs, PFCs and SF6, contributed 0.337 W m–2 to the total. Uncertainties (90% confidence ranges) were assessed to be approximately 10% for the WMGHGs. The major changes to the science since AR4 are the updating of the atmospheric concentrations, the inclusion of new species (NF3 and SO2F2) and discussion of {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} for CO2. Since AR4 N2O has overtaken CFC-12 as the third largest contributor to RF. The total {Glossary.*Well_mixed_greenhouse_gas WMGHG} RF is now 2.83 (2.54 to 3.12) W m–2.

The RFs in this section are derived from the observed differences in concentrations of the WMGHGs between 1750 and 2011. The concentrations of CO2, CH4 and N2O vary throughout the pre-industrial era, mostly due to varying climate, with a possible small contribution from {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Topics.*Emissions emissions} (MacFarling Meure et al., 2006). These variations do not contribute to uncertainty in the RF as strictly defined here, but do affect the RF {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution} to anthropogenic emissions. On centennial time scales, variations in late {Glossary.*Holocene Holocene} concentrations of CO2 are around 10 ppm (see note to {'Table_2_1 Table 2.1}), much larger than the uncertainty in the 1750 concentration. This would equate to a variation in the RF of 10%. For CH4 and N2O the centennial variations are comparable to the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in the 1750 concentrations and so do not significantly affect the estimate of the 1750 value used in calculating RF.
