index: hide
name: Lewis Structures

We also use Lewis symbols to indicate the formation of covalent bonds, which are shown in  **Lewis structures**, drawings that describe the bonding in molecules and polyatomic ions. For example, when two chlorine atoms form a chlorine molecule, they share one pair of electrons:


{image:'CNX_Chem_7_3_C12dot_img}
        

The Lewis structure indicates that each Cl atom has three pairs of electrons that are not used in bonding (called  **lone pairs**) and one shared pair of electrons (written between the atoms). A dash (or line) is sometimes used to indicate a shared pair of electrons:


{image:'CNX_Chem_7_3_Cl2dash_img}
        

A single shared pair of electrons is called a  **single bond**. Each Cl atom interacts with eight valence electrons: the six in the lone pairs and the two in the single bond.

## The Octet Rule

The other halogen molecules (F<sub>2</sub>, Br<sub>2</sub>, I<sub>2</sub>, and At<sub>2</sub>) form bonds like those in the chlorine molecule: one single bond between atoms and three lone pairs of electrons per atom. This allows each halogen atom to have a noble gas electron configuration. The tendency of main group atoms to form enough bonds to obtain eight valence electrons is known as the  **octet rule**.

The number of bonds that an atom can form can often be predicted from the number of electrons needed to reach an octet (eight valence electrons); this is especially true of the nonmetals of the second period of the periodic table (C, N, O, and F). For example, each atom of a group 14 element has four electrons in its outermost shell and therefore requires four more electrons to reach an octet. These four electrons can be gained by forming four covalent bonds, as illustrated here for carbon in CCl<sub>4</sub> (carbon tetrachloride) and silicon in SiH<sub>4</sub> (silane). Because hydrogen only needs two electrons to fill its valence shell, it is an exception to the octet rule. The transition elements and inner transition elements also do not follow the octet rule:


{image:'CNX_Chem_7_3_XY4struc_img}
        

Group 15 elements such as nitrogen have five valence electrons in the atomic Lewis symbol: one lone pair and three unpaired electrons. To obtain an octet, these atoms form three covalent bonds, as in NH<sub>3</sub> (ammonia). Oxygen and other atoms in group 16 obtain an octet by forming two covalent bonds:


{image:'CNX_Chem_7_3_numbonds_img}
        

## Double and Triple Bonds

As previously mentioned, when a pair of atoms shares one pair of electrons, we call this a single bond. However, a pair of atoms may need to share more than one pair of electrons in order to achieve the requisite octet. A  **double bond** forms when two pairs of electrons are shared between a pair of atoms, as between the carbon and oxygen atoms in CH<sub>2</sub>O (formaldehyde) and between the two carbon atoms in C<sub>2</sub>H<sub>4</sub> (ethylene):


{image:'CNX_Chem_7_3_DoubleBond_img}
        

A  **triple bond** forms when three electron pairs are shared by a pair of atoms, as in carbon monoxide (CO) and the cyanide ion (CN<sup>–</sup>):


{image:'CNX_Chem_7_3_COCN_img}
        
