index: hide
name: Power of Doing Useful Work

Work done by a person is sometimes called  **useful work**, which is  *work done on the outside world*, such as lifting weights. Useful work requires a force exerted through a distance on the outside world, and so it excludes internal work, such as that done by the heart when pumping blood. Useful work does include that done in climbing stairs or accelerating to a full run, because these are accomplished by exerting forces on the outside world. Forces exerted by the body are nonconservative, so that they can change the mechanical energy (<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mrow><mtext>KE </mtext><mo stretchy="false">+</mo><mtext> PE</mtext></mrow></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;&quot;KE &quot;+&quot; PE&quot;&#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>) of the system worked upon, and this is often the goal. A baseball player throwing a ball, for example, increases both the ball’s kinetic and potential energy.

If a person needs more energy than they consume, such as when doing vigorous work, the body must draw upon the chemical energy stored in fat. So exercise can be helpful in losing fat. However, the amount of exercise needed to produce a loss in fat, or to burn off extra calories consumed that day, can be large, as  illustrates.


{image:'Figure_8_8_2a}
        


| Activity | Energy consumption in watts | Oxygen consumption in liters O<sub>2</sub>/min  |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Sleeping | 83 | 0.24 |
| Sitting at rest | 120 | 0.34 |
| Standing relaxed | 125 | 0.36 |
| Sitting in class | 210 | 0.60 |
| Walking (5 km/h) | 280 | 0.80 |
| Cycling (13–18 km/h) | 400 | 1.14 |
| Shivering | 425 | 1.21 |
| Playing tennis | 440 | 1.26 |
| Swimming breaststroke | 475 | 1.36 |
| Ice skating (14.5 km/h) | 545 | 1.56 |
| Climbing stairs (116/min) | 685 | 1.96 |
| Cycling (21 km/h) | 700 | 2.00 |
| Running cross-country | 740 | 2.12 |
| Playing basketball | 800 | 2.28 |
| Cycling, professional racer | 1855 | 5.30 |
| Sprinting | 2415 | 6.90 |
    

All bodily functions, from thinking to lifting weights, require energy. (See {'Figure_8_8_3a Figure 8.8.3a}.) The many small muscle actions accompanying all quiet activity, from sleeping to head scratching, ultimately become thermal energy, as do less visible muscle actions by the heart, lungs, and digestive tract. Shivering, in fact, is an involuntary response to low body temperature that pits muscles against one another to produce thermal energy in the body (and do no work). The kidneys and liver consume a surprising amount of energy, but the biggest surprise of all is that a full 25% of all energy consumed by the body is used to maintain electrical potentials in all living cells. (Nerve cells use this electrical potential in nerve impulses.) This bioelectrical energy ultimately becomes mostly thermal energy, but some is utilized to power chemical processes such as in the kidneys and liver, and in fat production.


{image:'Figure_8_8_3a}
        
