index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.5.5.8.1
title: 12.5.5.8.1 - Long-term Droughts

As noted in {Chapters.5.5_5.5_5_5 Section 5.5.5}, long-term droughts (often called megadroughts, see Glossary) are a recurring feature of {Glossary.*Holocene Holocene} {Glossary.*Paleoclimate paleoclimate} records in North America, East and South Asia, Europe, Africa and India. The transitions into and out of the long-term droughts take many years. Because the long-term droughts all ended, they are not irreversible. Nonetheless transitions over years to a decade into a state of long-term {Glossary.*Drought drought} would have impacts on human and natural systems.

{cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} {Topics.*Climate_Projections climate model projections} ({cite.12.'Milly_et_al_2008}) and CMIP5 ensembles ({'Figure_12_23 Figure 12.23}) both suggest widespread drying and drought across most of southwestern North America and many other subtropical regions by the mid to late 21st century (see {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_5 Section 12.4.5}), although without abrupt change. Some studies suggest that this subtropical drying may have already begun in southwestern North America ({cite.12.'Seager_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Seidel_and_Randel_2007}; {cite.12.'Barnett_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Pierce_et_al_2008}). More recent studies ({cite.12.'Hoerling_et_al_2010}; {cite.12.'Seager_and_Vecchi_2010}; {cite.12.'Dai_2011}; {cite.12.'Seager_and_Naik_2012}) suggest that regional reductions in precipitation are due primarily to {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} and that the {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forced trends are currently weak in comparison.

While previous long-term droughts in southwest North America arose from natural causes, {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} project that this {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} will undergo progressive aridification as part of a general drying and poleward expansion of the subtropical dry zones driven by rising {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} ({cite.12.'Held_and_Soden_2006}; {cite.12.'Seager_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Seager_and_Vecchi_2010}). The models project the aridification to intensify steadily as {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF} and global warming progress without abrupt changes. Because of the very long {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} of the anthropogenic atmospheric {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} perturbation, such drying induced by global warming would be largely irreversible on millennium time scale ({cite.12.'Solomon_et_al_2009}; Frölicher and Joos, 2010; {cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2011}) (see Sections {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_2 12.5.2} and {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_4 12.5.4}). For example, {cite.12.'Solomon_et_al_2009 Solomon et al. (2009)} found in a simulation where atmospheric CO2 increases to 600 ppm followed by zero {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, that the 15% reduction in precipitation in areas such as southwest North America, southern Europe and western Australia would persist long after emissions ceased. This, however, is largely a consequence of the warming persisting for centuries after emissions cease rather than an irreversible behaviour of the {Glossary.*Water_cycle water cycle} itself.
