index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 1.3.4.1
title: 1.3.4.1 - Sea Level

Global {Glossary.*Mean_sea_level mean sea level} is an important indicator of climate change ({Chapters.3.3_7 Section 3.7} and {Chapters.13 Chapter 13}). The previous assessments have all shown that observations indicate that the globally averaged sea level is rising. Direct observations of {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} have been made for more than 150 years with tide gauges, and for more than 20 years with satellite radar altimeters. Although there is regional variability from non-uniform density change, circulation changes, and deformation of ocean basins, the evidence indicates that the global mean sea level is rising, and that this is likely (according to {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} and SREX) resulting from global climate change (ocean warming plus land ice melt; see {Chapters.13 Chapter 13} for AR5 findings). The historical {Glossary.*Tide_gauge tide gauge} record shows that the average rate of global mean sea level rise over the 20th century was 1.7 ± 0.2 mm yr–1 (e.g., {cite.1.'Church_and_White_2011}). This rate increased to 3.2 ± 0.4 mm yr–1 since 1990, mostly because of increased {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion thermal expansion} and land ice contributions ({cite.1.'Church_and_White_2011}; {cite.1.'IPCC_2012b}). Although the long-term sea level record shows decadal and multi-decadal oscillations, there is evidence that the rate of global mean sea level rise during the 20th century was greater than during the 19th century.

All of the previous IPCC assessments have projected that global sea level will continue to rise throughout this century for the {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} examined. {'Figure_1_10 Figure 1.10} compares the observed sea level rise since 1950 with the {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} from the prior IPCC assessments. Earlier models had greater {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in modelling the contributions, because of limited observational evidence and deficiencies in theoretical understanding of relevant processes. Also, projections for {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} in the prior assessments are scenarios for the response to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} only; they do not include unforced or natural interannual variability. Nonetheless, the results show that the actual change is in the middle of projected changes from the prior assessments, and towards the higher end of the studies from {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} and AR4.

{image:'Figure_1_10}
