index: hide
name: Transverse and Longitudinal Waves

A simple wave consists of a periodic disturbance that propagates from one place to another. The wave in {'Figure_17_9_3a Figure 17.9.3a} propagates in the horizontal direction while the surface is disturbed in the vertical direction. Such a wave is called a  **transverse wave** or shear wave; in such a wave, the disturbance is perpendicular to the direction of propagation. In contrast, in a  **longitudinal wave** or compressional wave, the disturbance is parallel to the direction of propagation. {'Figure_17_9_4a Figure 17.9.4a} shows an example of a longitudinal wave. The size of the disturbance is its amplitude  *X* and is completely independent of the speed of propagation <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:fo="urn:oasis:names:tc:opendocument:xmlns:xsl-fo-compatible:1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><msub><mi>v</mi><mrow><mtext>w</mtext></mrow></msub></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;v rSub &#123; size 8&#123;w&#125; &#125; &#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>.


{image:'Figure_17_9_3a}
        


{image:'Figure_17_9_4a}
        

Waves may be transverse, longitudinal, or  *a combination of the two*. (Water waves are actually a combination of transverse and longitudinal. The simplified water wave illustrated in {'Figure_17_9_2a Figure 17.9.2a} **
shows no longitudinal motion of the bird.) The waves on the strings of musical instruments are transverse—so are electromagnetic waves, such as visible light.

Sound waves in air and water are longitudinal. Their disturbances are periodic variations in pressure that are transmitted in fluids. Fluids do not have appreciable shear strength, and thus the sound waves in them must be longitudinal or compressional. Sound in solids can be both longitudinal and transverse.


{image:'Figure_17_9_5a}
        

Earthquake waves under Earth’s surface also have both longitudinal and transverse components (called compressional or P-waves and shear or S-waves, respectively). These components have important individual characteristics—they propagate at different speeds, for example. Earthquakes also have surface waves that are similar to surface waves on water.
