index: hide
name: sp Hybridization

#  *sp* Hybridization

The beryllium atom in a gaseous BeCl<sub>2</sub> molecule is an example of a central atom with no lone pairs of electrons in a linear arrangement of three atoms. There are two regions of valence electron density in the BeCl<sub>2</sub> molecule that correspond to the two covalent Be–Cl bonds. To accommodate these two electron domains, two of the Be atom’s four valence orbitals will mix to yield two hybrid orbitals. This hybridization process involves mixing of the valence  *s* orbital with one of the valence  *p* orbitals to yield two equivalent  **sp hybrid orbitals** that are oriented in a linear geometry ({'Figure_8_2_spGeom Figure 8.2.spGeom}). In this figure, the set of  *sp* orbitals appears similar in shape to the original  *p* orbital, but there is an important difference. The number of atomic orbitals combined always equals the number of hybrid orbitals formed. The  *p* orbital is one orbital that can hold up to two electrons. The  *sp* set is two equivalent orbitals that point 180° from each other. The two electrons that were originally in the  *s* orbital are now distributed to the two  *sp* orbitals, which are half filled. In gaseous BeCl<sub>2</sub>, these half-filled hybrid orbitals will overlap with orbitals from the chlorine atoms to form two identical σ bonds.


{image:'Figure_8_2_spGeom}
        

We illustrate the electronic differences in an isolated Be atom and in the bonded Be atom in the orbital energy-level diagram in {'Figure_8_2_spDiag Figure 8.2.spDiag}. These diagrams represent each orbital by a horizontal line (indicating its energy) and each electron by an arrow. Energy increases toward the top of the diagram. We use one upward arrow to indicate one electron in an orbital and two arrows (up and down) to indicate two electrons of opposite spin.


{image:'Figure_8_2_spDiag}
        

When atomic orbitals hybridize, the valence electrons occupy the newly created orbitals. The Be atom had two valence electrons, so each of the  *sp* orbitals gets one of these electrons. Each of these electrons pairs up with the unpaired electron on a chlorine atom when a hybrid orbital and a chlorine orbital overlap during the formation of the Be–Cl bonds.

Any central atom surrounded by just two regions of valence electron density in a molecule will exhibit  *sp* hybridization. Other examples include the mercury atom in the linear HgCl<sub>2</sub> molecule, the zinc atom in Zn(CH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>, which contains a linear C–Zn–C arrangement, and the carbon atoms in HCCH and CO<sub>2</sub>.
