index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.1.3
title: 8.7.1.3 - The Global Temperature change Potential Concept

Compared to the {Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP}, the Global Temperature change Potential (GTP; {cite.8.'Shine_et_al_2005a}) goes one step further down the cause–effect chain ({'Figure_8_27 Figure 8.27}) and is defined as the change in global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} at a chosen point in time in response to an emission pulse—relative to that of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}. Whereas GWP is integrated in time ({'Figure_8_28 Figure 8.28}a), GTP is an end-point {Glossary.*Metric metric} that is based on temperature change for a selected year, t, (see {'Figure_8_28 Figure 8.28}b with formula). Like for the GWP, the impact from CO2 is normally used as reference, hence, for a component i, GTP(t)i = AGTP(t)i / AGTP(t)CO2 = ∆T((t)i /∆T(t)CO2, where AGTP is the absolute GTP giving temperature change per unit emission (see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.11 for equations and parameter values). {cite.8.'Shine_et_al_2005a Shine et al. (2005a)} presented the GTP for both pulse and sustained emission changes based on an {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} model as well as analytical equations. A modification was later introduced ({cite.8.'Shine_et_al_2007}) in which the time horizon is determined by the proximity to a target year as calculated by using {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} and {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} (see {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1.8_7_1_5 Section 8.7.1.5}).

Like GWP, the GTP values can be used for weighting the {Topics.*Emissions emissions} to obtain ‘CO2 equivalents’ (see {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1.8_7_1_1 Section 8.7.1.1}). This gives the where i is component, t is time, and s is time of emission ({cite.8.'Berntsen_and_Fuglestvedt_2008}; {cite.8.'Peters_et_al_2011b}; {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2011}).

By accounting for the {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} and the exchange of heat between the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} and the ocean, the GTP includes physical processes that the GWP does not. The GTP accounts for the slow response of the (deep) ocean, thereby prolonging the response to emissions beyond what is controlled by the decay time of the atmospheric concentration. Thus the GTP includes both the atmospheric adjustment time scale of the component considered and the {Glossary.*Adjustment_time_or_response_time_Ta response time} scale of the climate system.

The GWP and GTP are fundamentally different by construction and different numerical values can be expected. In particular, the GWPs for NTCFs, over the same time frames, are higher than GTPs due to the integrative nature of the metric. The GTP values can be significantly affected by assumptions about the climate sensitivity and heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} by the ocean. Thus, the relative {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} ranges are wider for the GTP compared to GWP (see {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1.8_7_1_4 Section 8.7.1.4}). The additional uncertainty is a typical trade-off when moving along the cause–effect chain to an effect of greater societal relevance ({'Figure_8_27 Figure 8.27}). The formulation of the ocean response in the GTP has a substantial effect on the values; thus its characterization also represents a trade-off between simplicity and accuracy. As for GWP, the GTP is also influenced by the background {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}, and the way indirect effects and feedbacks are included (see {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1.8_7_1_4 Section 8.7.1.4}).
