index: hide
name: Heart Sounds

One of the simplest, yet effective, diagnostic techniques applied to assess the state of a patient’s heart is auscultation using a stethoscope.

In a normal, healthy heart, there are only two audible  **heart sounds**: S<sub>1</sub> and S<sub>2</sub>. S<sub>1</sub> is the sound created by the closing of the atrioventricular valves during ventricular contraction and is normally described as a “lub,” or first heart sound. The second heart sound, S<sub>2</sub>, is the sound of the closing of the semilunar valves during ventricular diastole and is described as a “dub” ({'Figure_20_3_3 Figure 20.3.3}). In both cases, as the valves close, the openings within the atrioventricular septum guarded by the valves will become reduced, and blood flow through the opening will become more turbulent until the valves are fully closed. There is a third heart sound, S<sub>3</sub>, but it is rarely heard in healthy individuals. It may be the sound of blood flowing into the atria, or blood sloshing back and forth in the ventricle, or even tensing of the chordae tendineae. S<sub>3</sub> may be heard in youth, some athletes, and pregnant women. If the sound is heard later in life, it may indicate congestive heart failure, warranting further tests. Some cardiologists refer to the collective S<sub>1</sub>, S<sub>2</sub>, and S<sub>3</sub> sounds as the “Kentucky gallop,” because they mimic those produced by a galloping horse. The fourth heart sound, S<sub>4</sub>, results from the contraction of the atria pushing blood into a stiff or hypertrophic ventricle, indicating failure of the left ventricle. S<sub>4</sub> occurs prior to S<sub>1</sub> and the collective sounds S<sub>4</sub>, S<sub>1</sub>, and S<sub>2</sub> are referred to by some cardiologists as the “Tennessee gallop,” because of their similarity to the sound produced by a galloping horse with a different gait. A few individuals may have both S<sub>3 </sub>and S<sub>4</sub>, and this combined sound is referred to as S<sub>7</sub>.


{image:'Figure_20_3_3}
        

The term  **murmur** is used to describe an unusual sound coming from the heart that is caused by the turbulent flow of blood. Murmurs are graded on a scale of 1 to 6, with 1 being the most common, the most difficult sound to detect, and the least serious. The most severe is a 6. Phonocardiograms or auscultograms can be used to record both normal and abnormal sounds using specialized electronic stethoscopes.

During auscultation, it is common practice for the clinician to ask the patient to breathe deeply. This procedure not only allows for listening to airflow, but it may also amplify heart murmurs. Inhalation increases blood flow into the right side of the heart and may increase the amplitude of right-sided heart murmurs. Expiration partially restricts blood flow into the left side of the heart and may amplify left-sided heart murmurs. {'Figure_20_3_4 Figure 20.3.4} indicates proper placement of the bell of the stethoscope to facilitate auscultation.


{image:'Figure_20_3_4}
        
