index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.2.1.3
title: 11.2.1.3 - Diagnostic Predictability Studies

Diagnostic predictability studies are based on analyses of the observed record or the output of {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}. Because long data records are needed, diagnostic multi-annual to decadal predictability studies based on observational data are comparatively few. {cite.11.'Newman_2007 Newman (2007)} and {cite.11.'Alexander_et_al_2008 Alexander et al. (2008)} develop multivariate empirical Linear Inverse Models (LIMs) from observation-based SSTs and find predictability for {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} and PDV type patterns that are generally limited to the order of a year although exceeding this in some areas. {cite.11.'Zanna_2012 Zanna (2012)} develops a LIM based on Atlantic SSTs and infers the possibility of decadal scale predictability. {cite.11.'Hoerling_et_al_2011 Hoerling et al. (2011)} appeal to forced climate change relative to the 1971–2000 period together with the statistics of natural variability to infer the potential for the {Topics.*Climate_Predictions prediction} of temperature over North America for 2011–2020.

{cite.11.'Tziperman_et_al_2008 Tziperman et al. (2008)} apply LIM-based methods to Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL) model output, as do {cite.11.'Hawkins_and_Sutton_2009 Hawkins and Sutton (2009)} and {cite.11.'Hawkins_et_al_2011 Hawkins et al. (2011)} to Hadley Centre model output and find predictability up to a decade or more for the AMOC and North Atlantic {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST}. {cite.11.'Branstator_et_al_2012 Branstator et al. (2012)} use analog and multivariate linear regression methods to quantify the predictability of the internally generatedcomponentofupperoceantemperatureinresultsfromsixcoupled models. Results differ considerably across models but offer some areas of commonality. Basin-average estimates indicate predictability for up to a decade in the North Atlantic and somewhat less in the North Pacific. {cite.11.'Branstator_and_Teng_2012 Branstator and Teng (2012)} assess the predictability of both the internally generated and forced component of upper ocean temperature in results from 12 coupled models participating in CMIP5. They infer potential predictability from initializing the internally generated component for 5 years in the North Pacific and 9 years in the North Atlantic while the forced component dominates after 6.5 and 8 years in the two basins. Results vary among models, although with some agreement for internal component predictability in subpolar {Glossary.*Gyre gyre} regions.

Studies of ‘potential predictability’ take a number of forms but broadly assume that overall variability may be separated into a long time scale component of interest and shorter time scale components that are unpredictable on these long time scales, written symbolically as s2X = s2v + s2e. The fraction p = s2v / s2X is a measure of potentially predictable variance provided that hypothesis that s2v is zero may be rejected. Small p indicates either a lack of long time scale variability or its smallness as a fraction of the total. {Glossary.*Predictability Predictability} is ‘potential’ in the sense that the existence of appreciable long time scale variability is not a direct indication that it may be skilfully predicted. There are a number of approaches to estimating potential predictability each with its statistical difficulties (e.g., {cite.11.'DelSole_and_Feng_2013}). At multi-annual time scales the potential predictability of the internally generated component of temperature is studied in {cite.11.'Boer_2000 Boer (2000)}, {cite.11.'Collins_2002 Collins (2002)}, {cite.11.'Pohlmann_et_al_2004 Pohlmann et al. (2004)}, {cite.11.'Power_and_Colman_2006 Power and Colman (2006)} and, in a multi-model context, in {cite.11.'Boer_2004 Boer (2004)} and {cite.11.'Boer_and_Lambert_2008 Boer and Lambert (2008)}. {cite.11.'Power_and_Colman_2006 Power and Colman (2006)} report that potential predictability in the ocean tends to increase with latitude and depth. Multi-model results for both externally forced and internally generated components of the potential predictability of decadal means of surface air temperature in simulations of 21st century climate in CMIP3 model data are analysed in {cite.11.'Boer_2011 Boer (2011)} and results based on CMIP5 model data are shown in {'Figure_11_2 Figure 11.2}. Potential predictability of 5-year means for internally generated variability is found over extratropical oceans but is generally weak over land while that associated with the decadal change in the forced component is found in tropical areas and over some land areas.

{image:'Figure_11_1}

{image:'Figure_11_2}

Predictability studies of precipitation on long time scales are comparatively few. {cite.11.'Jai_and_DelSole_2012 Jai and DelSole (2012)} identify ‘optimally predictable’ fractions of internally generated temperature and precipitation variance over land on multi-year time scales in the control simulations of 10 models participating in CMIP5, with results that vary considerably from model to model. {cite.11.'Boer_and_Lambert_2008 Boer and Lambert (2008)} find little potential predictability for decadal means of precipitation in the internally generated variability of a collection of CMIP3 model control simulations other than over parts of the North Atlantic. This is also the case for the internally generated component of CMIP3 precipitation in 21st century climate change simulations in {cite.11.'Boer_2011 Boer (2011)} although there is evidence of potential predictability for the forced component of precipitation mainly at higher latitudes and for longer time scales.
