index: hide
name: The Frequency of Motor Neuron Stimulation

A single action potential from a motor neuron will produce a single contraction in the muscle fibers of its motor unit. This isolated contraction is called a  **twitch**. A twitch can last for a few milliseconds or 100 milliseconds, depending on the muscle type. The tension produced by a single twitch can be measured by a  **myogram**, an instrument that measures the amount of tension produced over time ({'Figure_10_4_3 Figure 10.4.3}). Each twitch undergoes three phases. The first phase is the  **latent period**, during which the action potential is being propagated along the sarcolemma and Ca<sup>++</sup> ions are released from the SR. This is the phase during which excitation and contraction are being coupled but contraction has yet to occur. The  **contraction phase** occurs next. The Ca<sup>++</sup> ions in the sarcoplasm have bound to troponin, tropomyosin has shifted away from actin-binding sites, cross-bridges formed, and sarcomeres are actively shortening to the point of peak tension. The last phase is the  **relaxation phase**, when tension decreases as contraction stops. Ca<sup>++</sup> ions are pumped out of the sarcoplasm into the SR, and cross-bridge cycling stops, returning the muscle fibers to their resting state.


{image:'Figure_10_4_3}
        

Although a person can experience a muscle “twitch,” a single twitch does not produce any significant muscle activity in a living body. A series of action potentials to the muscle fibers is necessary to produce a muscle contraction that can produce work. Normal muscle contraction is more sustained, and it can be modified by input from the nervous system to produce varying amounts of force; this is called a  **graded muscle response**. The frequency of action potentials (nerve impulses) from a motor neuron and the number of motor neurons transmitting action potentials both affect the tension produced in skeletal muscle.

The rate at which a motor neuron fires action potentials affects the tension produced in the skeletal muscle. If the fibers are stimulated while a previous twitch is still occurring, the second twitch will be stronger. This response is called  **wave summation**, because the excitation-contraction coupling effects of successive motor neuron signaling is summed, or added together ({'Figure_10_4_4 Figure 10.4.4} **a**). At the molecular level, summation occurs because the second stimulus triggers the release of more Ca<sup>++</sup> ions, which become available to activate additional sarcomeres while the muscle is still contracting from the first stimulus. Summation results in greater contraction of the motor unit.


{image:'Figure_10_4_4}
        

If the frequency of motor neuron signaling increases, summation and subsequent muscle tension in the motor unit continues to rise until it reaches a peak point. The tension at this point is about three to four times greater than the tension of a single twitch, a state referred to as incomplete tetanus. During incomplete tetanus, the muscle goes through quick cycles of contraction with a short relaxation phase for each. If the stimulus frequency is so high that the relaxation phase disappears completely, contractions become continuous in a process called complete  **tetanus** ({'Figure_10_4_4 Figure 10.4.4} **b**).

During tetanus, the concentration of Ca<sup>++</sup> ions in the sarcoplasm allows virtually all of the sarcomeres to form cross-bridges and shorten, so that a contraction can continue uninterrupted (until the muscle fatigues and can no longer produce tension).
