index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.4.1
title: 6.4.1 - Introduction

In this section, we assess coupled model {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of changes in the evolution of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}, {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} and {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O} fluxes, and hence the role of carbon and other biogeochemical cycles in future climate under socioeconomic emission {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} (see {Box_6_4 Box 6.4}). {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} reported how climate change can affect the natural carbon cycle in a way that could feed back onto climate itself. A comparison of 11 coupled climate–carbon cycle models of different complexity (Coupled {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle Carbon Cycle} Climate–{Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project (C4MIP); {cite.6.'Friedlingstein_et_al_2006}) showed that all 11 models simulated a positive {Glossary.*Feedback feedback}. There is substantial quantitative {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in future CO2 and temperature, both across coupled carbon–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} ({cite.6.'Friedlingstein_et_al_2006}; {cite.6.'Plattner_et_al_2008}) and within each model parametrizations ({cite.6.'Falloon_et_al_2011}; {cite.6.'Booth_et_al_2012}; {cite.6.'Higgins_and_Harte_2012}). This uncertainty on the coupling between carbon cycle and climate is of comparable magnitude to the uncertainty caused by physical climate processes discussed in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12} of this Report ({cite.6.'Denman_et_al_2007}; {cite.6.'Gregory_et_al_2009}; {cite.6.'Huntingford_et_al_2009}).

Other biogeochemical cycles and feedbacks play an important role in the future of the climate system, although the carbon cycle represents the strongest of these. Natural CH4 {Topics.*Emissions emissions} from wetland and fires are sensitive to climate change (Sections {Chapters.6.6_2 6.2}, {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_7 6.4.7} and {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_3.6_3_3_2 6.3.3.2}). The fertilising effects of {Glossary.*Nitrogen_deposition nitrogen deposition} and rising CO2 also affect CH4 emissions by wetlands through increased plant productivity ({cite.6.'Stocker_et_al_2013}). Changes in the nitrogen cycle, in addition to interactions with CO2 sources and sinks, are very likely to affect the emissions of N2O both on land and from the ocean (Sections {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_4.6_3_4_2 6.3.4.2} and {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_6 6.4.6}) and potentially on the rate of CH4 oxidation (Gärdenäs et al., 2011). A recent review highlighted the complexity of terrestrial biogeochemical feedbacks on climate change ({cite.6.'Arneth_et_al_2010}) and used the methodology of {cite.6.'Gregory_et_al_2009 Gregory et al. (2009)} to express their magnitude in common units of W m–2 °C–1 ({'Figure_6_20 Figure 6.20}). A similar degree of complexity exists in the ocean and in interactions between land, {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} and ocean cycles. Many of these processes are not yet represented in coupled climate–biogeochemistry models. {cite.6.'Leuzinger_et_al_2011 Leuzinger et al. (2011)} observed a {Glossary.*Trend trend} from manipulation experiments for higher-order interactions between feedbacks to reduce the magnitude of response. Confidence in the magnitude, and sometimes even the sign, of many of these feedbacks between climate and carbon and other biogeochemical cycles is low.

{image:'Figure_6_20}

The response of land and ocean carbon storage to changes in climate, atmospheric CO2 and other {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} activities (e.g., {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change}; {'Table_6_2 Table 6.2}) varies strongly on different time scales. This chapter has assessed carbon cycle changes across many time scales from millennial (see {Chapters.6.6_2 Section 6.2}) to interannual and seasonal (see {Chapters.6.6_3 Section 6.3}), and these are summarized in {'Table_6_10 Table 6.10}. A common result is that an increase in atmospheric CO2 will always lead to an increase in land and ocean carbon storage, all other things being held constant. {cite.6.'Cox_et_al_2013 Cox et al. (2013)} find an empirical relationship between short-term interannual variability and long-term land tropical carbon cycle sensitivity that may offer an observational constraint on the climate–carbon cycle response over the next century. Generally, however, changes in climate on different time scales do not lead to a consistent sign and magnitude of the response in carbon storage change owing to the many different mechanisms that operate. Thus, changes in carbon cycling on one time scale cannot be extrapolated to make projections on different time scales, but can provide valuable information on the processes at work and can be used to evaluate and improve models.

{table:'Table_6_10}
