index: hide
name: Thyroid Gland

The  **thyroid gland** is located in the neck, just below the larynx and in front of the trachea, as shown in . It is a butterfly-shaped gland with two lobes that are connected by the  **isthmus**. It has a dark red color due to its extensive vascular system. When the thyroid swells due to dysfunction, it can be felt under the skin of the neck.


{image:'Figure_37_5_2}
        

The thyroid gland is made up of many spherical thyroid follicles, which are lined with a simple cuboidal epithelium. These follicles contain a viscous fluid, called  **colloid**, which stores the glycoprotein thyroglobulin, the precursor to the thyroid hormones. The follicles produce hormones that can be stored in the colloid or released into the surrounding capillary network for transport to the rest of the body via the circulatory system.

Thyroid follicle cells synthesize the hormone thyroxine, which is also known as T<sub>4</sub> because it contains four atoms of iodine, and triiodothyronine, also known as T<sub>3</sub> because it contains three atoms of iodine. Follicle cells are stimulated to release stored T<sub>3 </sub>and T<sub>4 </sub>by thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH), which is produced by the anterior pituitary. These thyroid hormones increase the rates of mitochondrial ATP production.

A third hormone, calcitonin, is produced by  **parafollicular cells** of the thyroid either releasing hormones or inhibiting hormones. Calcitonin release is not controlled by TSH, but instead is released when calcium ion concentrations in the blood rise. Calcitonin functions to help regulate calcium concentrations in body fluids. It acts in the bones to inhibit osteoclast activity and in the kidneys to stimulate excretion of calcium. The combination of these two events lowers body fluid levels of calcium.
