index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.2.4
title: 8.7.2.4 - Metrics and Impacts by Sector

While the {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs} vary strongly between sectors, the climate impacts of these gases are independent of sector. The latter is not the case for chemically active and short-lived components, due to the dependence of their impact on the emission location. Since most sectors have multiple co-emissions, and for NTCFs some of these are warming while others are cooling, the net impact of a given sector requires explicit calculations. Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, there has been significant progress in the understanding and quantification of climate impacts of NTCFs from sectors such as transportation, power production and {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} burning ({cite.8.'Berntsen_and_Fuglestvedt_2008}; {cite.8.'Skeie_et_al_2009}; {cite.8.'Stevenson_and_Derwent_2009}; {cite.8.'Lee_et_al_2010}; {cite.8.'Unger_et_al_2010}; {cite.8.'Dahlmann_et_al_2011}). Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.18 gives an overview of recent published {Glossary.*Metric metric} values for various components by sector.

The impact from sectors depends on choice of metric, time horizon, pulse versus sustained emissions and forward versus backward looking perspective (see {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1 Section 8.7.1} and {Box_8_4 Box 8.4}). {cite.8.'Unger_et_al_2010 Unger et al. (2010)} calculated RF for a set of components emitted from each sector. RF at chosen points in time (20 and 100 years) for sustained emissions was used by {cite.8.'Unger_et_al_2010 Unger et al. (2010)} as the metric for comparison. This is comparable to using integrated RF up to the chosen times for pulse emissions (as in GWPs). Such studies are relevant for policymaking that focuses on regulating the total activity of a sector or for understanding the contribution from a sector to climate change. On the other hand, the fixed mix of emissions makes it less general and relevant for emission {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}. Alternatively, one may adopt a component-by-component view which is relevant for policies directed towards specific components (or sets of components, as controlling an individual pollutant in isolation is usually not practical). But this view will not capture interactions and non-linearities within the suite of components emitted by most sectors. The effects of specific emission control technologies or policies or {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} societal changes on the mix of emissions is probably the most relevant type of analysis, but there are an enormous number of possible actions and regional details that could be investigated. {cite.8.'Henze_et_al_2012 Henze et al. (2012)} demonstrate a method for providing highly spatially resolved estimates of {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} per component, and caution that RF aggregated over regions or sectors may not represent the impacts of emissions changes on finer scales.

Metrics for individual land-based sectors are often similar to the global mean metric values ({cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2008}). In contrast, metrics for emissions from aviation and shipping usually show large differences from global mean metric values (Table 8.A.3 versus Table 8.SM.18). Though there can sometimes be substantial variation in the impact of landbased sectors across regions, and for a particular {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} even from one sector to another, variability between different land-based sources is generally smaller than between land, sea and air emissions.

NOx from aviation is one example where the metric type is especially important. GWP20 values are positive due to the strong response of short-lived {Glossary.*Ozone ozone}. Reported GWP100 and GTP100 values are of either sign, however, due to the differences in balance between the individual effects modelled. Even if the models agree on the net effect of NOX, the individual contributions can differ significantly, with large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} stemming from the relative magnitudes of the {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} and O3 responses ({cite.8.'Myhre_et_al_2011}) and the background tropospheric concentrations of NOX ({cite.8.'Holmes_et_al_2011}; {cite.8.'Stevenson_and_Derwent_2009}). Köhler et al. (2013), find strong regional sensitivity of ozone and CH4 to NOX particularly at cruise altitude. Generally, they find the strongest effects at low latitudes. For the aviation sector contrails and contrail induced cirrus are also important. Based on detailed studies in the literature, {cite.8.'Fuglestvedt_et_al_2010 Fuglestvedt et al. (2010)} produced {Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP} and GTP for contrails, water vapor and contrail-induced cirrus.

The GWP and GTPs for NOX from shipping are strongly negative for all time horizons. The strong positive effect via O3 due to the low-NOX environment into which ships generally emit NOX is outweighed by the stronger effect on CH4 destruction due to the relatively lower latitudes of these emissions compared to land-based sources.

In addition to having large emissions of NOX the shipping sector has large emission of SO2. The direct GWP100 for shipping ranges from –11 to –43 (see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.18). {cite.8.'Lauer_et_al_2007 Lauer et al. (2007)} reported detailed calculations of the indirect forcing specifically for this sector and found a wide spread of values depending on the emission inventory. {cite.8.'Righi_et_al_2011 Righi et al. (2011)} and {cite.8.'Peters_et_al_2012 Peters et al. (2012)} calculate indirect effects that are 30 to 50% lower than the indirect forcing reported by {cite.8.'Lauer_et_al_2007 Lauer et al. (2007)}. The values from {cite.8.'Shindell_and_Faluvegi_2010 Shindell and Faluvegi (2010)} for SO2 from power generation are similar to those for shipping.

Although the various land transport sectors often are treated as one aggregate (e.g., road transport) there are important subdivisions. For instance, {cite.8.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)} points out that among the {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC}-rich sectors they examined, diesel vehicles have the most clearly positive net impact on forcing. Studies delving even further have shown substantial differences between trucks and cars, gasoline and diesel vehicles, and low-sulphur versus high-sulphur fuels. Similarly, for power production there are important differences depending on fuel type (coal, oil, gas; e.g., {cite.8.'Shindell_and_Faluvegi_2010}).

In the assessment of climate impacts of current emissions by sectors we give examples and apply a forward-looking perspective on effects in terms of temperature change. The AGTP concept can be used to study the effects of the various components for chosen time horizons. A single year’s worth of current global emissions from the energy and industrial sectors have the largest contributions to warming after 100 years (see {'Figure_8_34 Figure 8.34}a). Household fossil fuel and biofuel, biomass burning and on-road transportation are also relatively large contributors to warming over 100-year time scales. Those same sectors, along with sectors that emit large amounts of CH4 (animal husbandry, waste/ landfills and agriculture), are most important over shorter time horizons (about 20 years; see {'Figure_8_34 Figure 8.34}b).

{image:'Figure_8_34}

Analysing climate change impacts by using the net effect of particular activities or sectors may—compared to other perspectives—provide more insight into how societal actions influence climate. Owing to large variations in mix of shortand long-lived components, as well as cooling and warming effects, the results will also in these cases depend strongly on choice of time horizon and climate impact parameter. Improved understanding of {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol}–cloud interactions, and how those are {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to individual components is clearly necessary to refine estimates of sectoral or emitted component impacts.
