index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.2.7.1
title: 7.2.7.1 - Contrails and Contrail-Induced Cirrus

Aviation jet engines emit hot moist air, which can form line shaped persistent condensation trails (contrails) in environments that are supersaturated with respect to ice and colder than about –40°C. The contrails are composed of ice crystals that are typically smaller than those of background cirrus ({cite.7.'Heymsfield_et_al_2010}; Frömming et al., 2011). Their effect on {Glossary.*Longwave_radiation longwave radiation} dominates over their shortwave effect ({cite.7.'Stuber_and_Forster_2007}; {cite.7.'Rap_et_al_2010b}; Burkhardt and Kärcher, 2011) but models disagree on the relative importance of the two effects. Contrails have been observed to spread into large cirrus sheets that may persist for several hours, and observational studies confirm their overall positive net RF impact ({cite.7.'Haywood_et_al_2009}).

{Glossary.*Aerosol Aerosol} emitted within the aircraft exhaust may also affect high-level cloudiness. This last effect is classified as an {Glossary.*Aerosol_cloud_interaction aerosol–cloud interaction} and is deemed too uncertain to be further assessed here (see also {Chapters.7.7_4.7_4_4 Section 7.4.4}). {Topics.*Climate_Modelling Climate model} experiments ({cite.7.'Rap_et_al_2010a}) confirm earlier results (Kalkstein and Balling Jr, 2004; {cite.7.'Ponater_et_al_2005}) that aviation contrails do not have, at current levels of coverage, an observable effect on the mean or diurnal range of {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} (medium confidence).

Estimates of the RF from persistent (linear) contrails often correspond to different years and need to be corrected for the continuous increase in air traffic. More recent estimates tend to indicate somewhat smaller RF than assessed in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} (see Table 7.SM.1 and text in Supplementary Material). We adopt an RF estimate of +0.01 (+0.005 to +0.03) W m–2 for persistent (linear) contrails for 2011, with a medium confidence attached to this estimate. An additional RF of +0.003 W m–2 is due to {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of water vapour in the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} by aviation as estimated by {cite.7.'Lee_et_al_2009 Lee et al. (2009)}.

{cite.7.'Forster_et_al_2007 Forster et al. (2007)} quoted {cite.7.'Sausen_et_al_2005 Sausen et al. (2005)} to update the 2000 {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} for aviation-induced cirrus (including linear contrails) to +0.03 (+0.01 to +0.08) W m–2 but did not consider this to be a best estimate because of large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}. {cite.7.'Schumann_and_Graf_2013 Schumann and Graf (2013)} constrained their model with observations of the diurnal cycle of contrails and cirrus in a {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} with high air traffic relative to a region with little air traffic, and estimated a RF of +0.05 (+0.04 to +0.08) W m–2 for contrails and contrail-induced cirrus in 2006, but their model has a large shortwave contribution, and larger estimates are possible. An alternative approach was taken by Burkhardt and Kärcher (2011), who estimated a global RF for 2002 of +0.03 W m–2 from contrails and contrail cirrus within a climate model (Burkhardt and Kärcher, 2009), after compensating for reduced background cirrus cloudiness in the main traffic areas. Based on these two studies we assess the combined contrail and contrail-induced cirrus {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} for the year 2011 to be +0.05 (+0.02 to +0.15) W m–2 to take into uncertainties on spreading rate, optical depth, ice particle shape and radiative transfer and the ongoing increase in air traffic (see also Supplementary Material). A low confidence is attached to this estimate.
