index: hide
name: Limitations of Phylogenetic Trees

It may be easy to assume that more closely related organisms look more alike, and while this is often the case, it is not always true. If two closely related lineages evolved under significantly varied surroundings, it is possible for the two groups to appear more different than other groups that are not as closely related. For example, the phylogenetic tree in {'Figure_20_1_3 Figure 20.1.3} shows that lizards and rabbits both have amniotic eggs; whereas, frogs do not. Yet lizards and frogs appear more similar than lizards and rabbits.


{image:'Figure_20_1_3}
        

Another aspect of phylogenetic trees is that, unless otherwise indicated, the branches do not account for length of time, only the evolutionary order. In other words, a branch's length does not typically mean more time passed, nor does a short branch mean less time passed— unless specified on the diagram. For example, in {'Figure_20_1_3 Figure 20.1.3}, the tree does not indicate how much time passed between the evolution of amniotic eggs and hair. What the tree does show is the order in which things took place. Again using {'Figure_20_1_3 Figure 20.1.3}, the tree shows that the oldest trait is the vertebral column, followed by hinged jaws, and so forth. Remember that any phylogenetic tree is a part of the greater whole, and like a real tree, it does not grow in only one direction after a new branch develops. Thus, for the organisms in {'Figure_20_1_3 Figure 20.1.3}, just because a vertebral column evolved does not mean that invertebrate evolution ceased. It only means that a new branch formed. Also, groups that are not closely related, but evolve under similar conditions, may appear more phenotypically similar to each other than to a close relative.
