index: hide
name: Skin Disorders

Two common skin disorders are eczema and acne. Eczema is an inflammatory condition and occurs in individuals of all ages. Acne involves the clogging of pores, which can lead to infection and inflammation, and is often seen in adolescents. Other disorders, not discussed here, include seborrheic dermatitis (on the scalp), psoriasis, cold sores, impetigo, scabies, hives, and warts.

## Eczema

 **Eczema** is an allergic reaction that manifests as dry, itchy patches of skin that resemble rashes ({'Figure_5_4_4 Figure 5.4.4}). It may be accompanied by swelling of the skin, flaking, and in severe cases, bleeding. Many who suffer from eczema have antibodies against dust mites in their blood, but the link between eczema and allergy to dust mites has not been proven. Symptoms are usually managed with moisturizers, corticosteroid creams, and immunosuppressants.


{image:'Figure_5_4_4}
        

## Acne

 **Acne** is a skin disturbance that typically occurs on areas of the skin that are rich in sebaceous glands (face and back). It is most common along with the onset of puberty due to associated hormonal changes, but can also occur in infants and continue into adulthood. Hormones, such as androgens, stimulate the release of sebum. An overproduction and accumulation of sebum along with keratin can block hair follicles. This plug is initially white. The sebum, when oxidized by exposure to air, turns black. Acne results from infection by acne-causing bacteria ( *Propionibacterium* and  *Staphylococcus*), which can lead to redness and potential scarring due to the natural wound healing process ({'Figure_5_4_5 Figure 5.4.5}).


{image:'Figure_5_4_5}
        
