index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.5.3
title: 12.4.5.3 - Soil Moisture

Near-surface soil moisture is the net result of a suite of complex processes (e.g., precipitation {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration}, drainage, overland flow, infiltration), and heterogeneous and difficult-to-characterize aboveground and belowground system properties (e.g., slope, soil texture). As a result, regional to global-scale simulations of soil moisture and {Glossary.*Drought drought} remain relatively uncertain ({cite.12.'Burke_and_Brown_2008}; Henderson-Sellers et al., 2008). The {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({Chapters.8.8_2.8_2_3.8_2_3_2 Section 8.2.3.2}) discussed the lack of assessments of global-scale models in their ability to simulate soil moisture, and this problem appears to have persisted ({Chapters.9.9_4.9_4_4.9_4_4_2 Section 9.4.4.2}). Furthermore, consistent multi-model {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of total soil moisture are difficult to make owing to substantial differences between {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} in the depth of their soil. However, {cite.12.'Koster_et_al_2009a Koster et al. (2009a)} argued that once climatological statistics affecting soil moisture were accounted for, different models tend to agree on soil moisture projections.

The AR4 summarized multi-model projections of 21st century annual mean soil moisture changes as decreasing in the subtropics and Mediterranean region, and increasing in east Africa and central Asia. {cite.12.'Dai_2013 Dai (2013)} found similar changes in an {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of 11 CMIP5 {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} under RCP4.5. {'Figure_12_23 Figure 12.23} shows projected changes in surface soil moisture (upper 10 cm) in the CMIP5 ensemble at the end of the 21st century under the {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} 2.6, 4.5, 6.0 and 8.5. We focus on this new CMIP5 specification because it describes soil moisture at a consistent depth across all CMIP5 models. The broad patterns are moderately consistent across the RCPs, with the changes tending to become stronger as the strength of the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} change increases. The agreement among CMIP5 models and the consistency with other physical features of climate change indicate high confidence in certain regions where surface soils are projected to dry. There is little-to-no confidence anywhere in projections of moister surface soils. Under {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}, with the largest projected change, individual ensemble members (not shown) show consistency across the ensemble for drying in the Mediterranean region, northeast and southwest South America, southern Africa, and southwestern USA. However, ensemble members show disagreement on the sign of change in large regions such as central Asia or the high northern latitudes. The Mediterranean, southwestern USA, northeast South America and southern African drying regions are consistent with projected widening of the {Glossary.*Hadley_Circulation Hadley Circulation} that shifts downwelling, thus inhibiting precipitation in these regions. The large-scale drying in the Mediterranean, southwest USA, and southern Africa appear across generations of projections and climate models and is deemed likely as global temperatures rise and will increase the risk of agricultural drought. In addition, an analysis of CMIP3 and CMIP5 projections of soil moisture in five drought-prone regions indicates that the differences in future forcing {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} are the largest {Glossary.*Source source} of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in such regions rather than differences between model responses ({cite.12.'Orlowsky_and_Seneviratne_2012}).

{image:'Figure_12_23}

Other recent assessments include multi-model ensemble approaches, dynamical {Glossary.*Downscaling downscaling}, and {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} models applied around the globe and illustrate the variety of issues influencing soil moisture changes. Analyses of the southwestern USA using CMIP3 models ({cite.12.'Christensen_and_Lettenmaier_2007}; {cite.12.'Seager_et_al_2007}) show consistent projections of drying, primarily due to a decrease in winter precipitation. In contrast, {cite.12.'Kellomaki_et_al_2010 Kellomaki et al. (2010)} find that SRES A2 projections for Finland yield decreased snow depth, but soil moisture generally increases, consistent with the general increase in precipitation occurring in high northern latitudes. {cite.12.'Kolomyts_and_Surova_2010 Kolomyts and Surova (2010)}, using projections from the CMIP3 models, GISS and HadCM2, under the SRES A2 forcing, show that vegetation type has substantial influence on the development of pronounced drying over the 21st century in Middle Volga Region forests.

Projected changes in soil moisture from the CMIP3/5 models also show substantial seasonal variation. For example, soil moisture changes in the North American midlatitudes, coupled with projected warming, increases the strength of land–{Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} coupling during spring and summer in 15 {Glossary.*Semi_empirical_model GCMs} under RCP8.5 ({cite.12.'Dirmeyer_et_al_2013}). For the Cline River watershed in western Canada, {cite.12.'Kienzle_et_al_2012 Kienzle et al. (2012)} find decreases in summer soil moisture content, but annual increases averaging 2.6% by the 2080s using a suite of CMIP3 GCMs simulating B1, A1B and A2 scenarios to drive a regional hydrology model. {cite.12.'Hansen_et_al_2007 Hansen et al. (2007)}, using dynamical downscaling of one GCM running the A2 scenario, find summer soil moisture decreases in Mongolia of up to 6% due to increased potential evaporation in a warming climate and decreased precipitation and decreased precipitation.

{Glossary.*Soil_moisture Soil moisture} projections in high latitude {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost} regions are critically important for assessing future climate feedbacks from tracegas {Topics.*Emissions emissions} ({cite.12.'Zhuang_et_al_2004}; {cite.12.'Riley_et_al_2011}) and vegetation changes ({cite.12.'Chapin_et_al_2005}). In addition to changes in precipitation, snow cover and evapotranspiration, future changes in high-latitude soil moisture also will depend on permafrost degradation, {Glossary.*Thermokarst thermokarst} evolution, rapid changes in drainage ({cite.12.'Smith_et_al_2005}), and changes in plant communities and their water demands. Current understanding of these interacting processes at scales relevant to climate is poor, so that full incorporation in current GCMs is lacking.
