index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.8
title: 4.2.2.8 - Arctic Land-Fast Ice

Shore or land-fast ice is {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} attached to the coast. Land-fast ice along the Arctic coast is usually grounded in shallow water, with the seaward edge typically around the 20 to 30 m isobath ({cite.4.'Mahoney_et_al_2007}). In fjords and confined bays, land-fast ice extends into deeper water.

There are no reliable estimates of the total area or interannual variability of land-fast ice in the Arctic. However, both significant and non-significant trends have been observed regionally. Long-term monitoring near Hopen, Svalbard, revealed thinning of land-fast ice in the Barents Sea {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} by 11 cm per decade between 1966 and 2007 ({cite.4.'Gerland_et_al_2008}). Between 1936 and 2000, the trends in land-fast ice thickness (in May) at four Siberian sites (Kara Sea, Laptev Sea, East Siberian Sea, Chukchi Sea) are insignificant ({cite.4.'Polyakov_et_al_2003}). A more recent composite time series of land-fast ice thickness between the mid 1960s and early 2000s from 15 stations along the Siberian coast revealed an average rate of thinning of 0.33 cm yr–1({cite.4.'Polyakov_et_al_2010}). End-of-winter ice thickness for three stations in the Canadian Arctic reveal a small downward {Glossary.*Trend trend} at Eureka, a small positive trend at Resolute Bay, and a negligible trend at Cambridge Bay (updated from Brown and Coté, 1992; {cite.4.'Melling_2012}), but these trends are small and not statistically significant. Even though the trend in the land-fast ice extent near Barrow, Alaska has not been significant ({cite.4.'Mahoney_et_al_2007}), relatively recent observations by {cite.4.'Mahoney_et_al_2007 Mahoney et al. (2007)} and {cite.4.'Druckenmiller_et_al_2009 Druckenmiller et al. (2009)} found longer ice-free seasons and thinner land-fast ice compared to earlier records ({cite.4.'Weeks_and_Gow_1978}; {cite.4.'Barry_et_al_1979}). As freeze-up happens later, the growth season shortens and the thinner ice breaks up and melts earlier.
