index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.7.2
title: 10.7.2 - Changes of Past Regional Temperature

Several reconstructions of European regional temperature variability are available ({Chapters.5.5_5 Section 5.5}). While {cite.10.'Bengtsson_et_al_2006 Bengtsson et al. (2006)} emphasized the role of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} in pre-industrial European climate as reconstructed by {cite.10.'Luterbacher_et_al_2004 Luterbacher et al. (2004)}, {cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2011a Hegerl et al. (2011a)} find a detectable response to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} in summer temperatures in the period 1500–1900, for winter temperatures during 1500–1950 and 1500–2000; and throughout the record for spring. The {Glossary.*Fingerprint fingerprint} of the forced response shows coherent time evolution between models and reconstructed temperatures over the entire analysed period (compare to annual results in {'Figure_10_19 Figure 10.19}, using a larger multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}). This suggests that the cold European winter conditions in the late 17th and early 19th century and the warming in between were at least partly externally driven.

Data assimilation results focussing on the European sector suggests that the explanation of forced response combined with internal variability is self-consistent ({cite.10.'Goosse_et_al_2012a}, {'Figure_10_19 Figure 10.19}). The assimilated simulations reproduce the warmth of the {Glossary.*Medieval_Climate_Anomaly MCA} better than the forced only simulations do. The response to individual forcings is difficult to distinguish from each other in noisier regional reconstructions. An epoch analysis of years immediately following strong, largely tropical, volcanic eruptions shows that European summers show detectable fingerprints of volcanic response , while winters show a noisy response of warming in northern Europe and cooling in southern Europe ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2011a}). {cite.10.'Landrum_et_al_2013 Landrum et al. (2013)} suggest similar volcanic responses for North America, with warming in the north of the continent and cooling in the south. There is also evidence for a decrease in SSTs following tropical volcanic forcing in tropical reconstructions over the past 450 years (D’Arrigo et al., 2009). There is also substantial literature suggesting solar influences on {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} reconstructions, possibly due to circulation changes, for example, changes in Northern Annular Modes (e.g., {cite.10.'Kobashi_et_al_2013}; see {Box_10_2 Box 10.2}).
