index: hide
name: Anatomy and Normal Microbiota of the Oral Cavity

Food enters the digestive tract through the mouth, where mechanical digestion (by chewing) and chemical digestion (by enzymes in  **saliva**) begin. Within the  **mouth** are the  **tongue**,  **teeth**, and  **salivary glands**, including the parotid, sublingual, and submandibular glands ({'Figure_24_1_OralCavity Figure 24.1.OralCavity}). The salivary glands produce saliva, which lubricates food and contains digestive enzymes.


{image:'Figure_24_1_OralCavity}
        

The structure of a  **tooth** ({'Figure_24_1_Tooth Figure 24.1.Tooth}) begins with the visible outer surface, called the  **crown**, which has to be extremely hard to withstand the force of biting and chewing. The crown is covered with  **enamel**, which is the hardest material in the body. Underneath the crown, a layer of relatively hard  **dentin** extends into the root of the tooth around the innermost  **pulp** cavity, which includes the pulp chamber at the top of the tooth and pulp canal, or  **root canal**, located in the root. The pulp that fills the pulp cavity is rich in blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, connective tissue, and nerves. The root of the tooth and some of the crown are covered with  **cementum**, which works with the periodontal ligament to anchor the tooth in place in the jaw bone. The soft tissues surrounding the teeth and bones are called  **gums**, or  **gingiva**. The  **gingival space** or  **gingival crevice** is located between the gums and teeth.


{image:'Figure_24_1_Tooth}
        

Microbes such as bacteria and archaea are abundant in the mouth and coat all of the surfaces of the oral cavity. However, different structures, such as the teeth or cheeks, host unique communities of both aerobic and anaerobic microbes. Some factors appear to work against making the mouth hospitable to certain microbes. For example, chewing allows microbes to mix better with saliva so they can be swallowed or spit out more easily. Saliva also contains enzymes, including  **lysozyme**, which can damage microbial cells. Recall that lysozyme is part of the first line of defense in the innate immune system and cleaves the β-(1,4) glycosidic linkages between N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) and N-acetylmuramic acid (NAM) in bacterial peptidoglycan (see <link:>). Additionally, fluids containing immunoglobulins and phagocytic cells are produced in the gingival spaces. Despite all of these chemical and mechanical activities, the mouth supports a large microbial community.
