index: hide
name: Type II (Cytotoxic) Hypersensitivities

Immune reactions categorized as  **type II hypersensitivities**, or  **cytotoxic hypersensitivities**, are mediated by IgG and IgM antibodies binding to cell-surface antigens or matrix-associated antigens on basement membranes. These antibodies can either activate  **complement**, resulting in an inflammatory response and lysis of the targeted cells, or they can be involved in  **antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC)** with  **cytotoxic T cell**s.

In some cases, the antigen may be a self-antigen, in which case the reaction would also be described as an  **autoimmune disease**. (Autoimmune diseases are described in <link:>). In other cases, antibodies may bind to naturally occurring, but exogenous, cell-surface molecules such as antigens associated with blood typing found on  **red blood cells** (RBCs). This leads to the coating of the RBCs by antibodies, activation of the complement cascade, and complement-mediated lysis of RBCs, as well as  **opsonization** of RBCs for phagocytosis. Two examples of type II hypersensitivity reactions involving RBCs are  **hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR)** and  **hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN)**. These type II hypersensitivity reactions, which will be discussed in greater detail, are summarized in .

Immunohematology is the study of blood and blood-forming tissue in relation to the immune response. Antibody-initiated responses against blood cells are type II hypersensitivities, thus falling into the field of  **immunohematology**. For students first learning about immunohematology, understanding the immunological mechanisms involved is made even more challenging by the complex nomenclature system used to identify different  **blood-group antigens**, often called  **blood types**. The first blood-group antigens either used alphabetical names or were named for the first person known to produce antibodies to the red blood cell antigen (e.g., Kell, Duffy, or Diego). However, in 1980, the International Society of Blood Transfusion (ISBT) Working Party on Terminology created a standard for blood-group terminology in an attempt to more consistently identify newly discovered blood group antigens. New antigens are now given a number and assigned to a blood-group system, collection, or series. However, even with this effort, blood-group nomenclature is still inconsistent.


****

| Common Name | Cause | Signs and Symptoms |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) | IgG from mother crosses the placenta, targeting the fetus’ RBCs for destruction | Anemia, edema, enlarged liver or spleen, hydrops (fluid in body cavity), leading to death of newborn in severe cases |
| Hemolytic transfusion reactions (HTR) | IgG and IgM bind to antigens on transfused RBCs, targeting donor RBCs for destruction | Fever, jaundice, hypotension, disseminated intravascular coagulation, possibly leading to kidney failure and death |
    

## ABO Blood Group Incompatibility

The recognition that individuals have different blood types was first described by Karl  **Landsteiner** (1868–1943) in the early 1900s, based on his observation that serum from one person could cause a clumping of RBCs from another. These studies led Landsteiner to the identification of four distinct blood types. Subsequent research by other scientists determined that the four blood types were based on the presence or absence of surface carbohydrates “A” and “B,” and this provided the foundation for the  **ABO blood group system** that is still in use today ({'Figure_19_1_ABO Figure 19.1.ABO}). The functions of these antigens are unknown, but some have been associated with normal biochemical functions of the cell. Furthermore, ABO blood types are inherited as alleles (one from each parent), and they display patterns of dominant and codominant inheritance. The alleles for A and B blood types are codominant to each other, and both are dominant over blood type O. Therefore, individuals with genotypes of AA or AO have type A blood and express the A carbohydrate antigen on the surface of their RBCs. People with genotypes of BB or BO have type B blood and express the B carbohydrate antigen on the surface of their RBCs. Those with a genotype of AB have type AB blood and express both A and B carbohydrate antigens on the surface of their RBCs. Finally, individuals with a genotype of OO have type O blood and lack A and B carbohydrate on the surface of their RBCs.

It is important to note that the RBCs of all four ABO blood types share a common protein receptor molecule, and it is the addition of specific carbohydrates to the protein receptors that determines A, B, and AB blood types. The genes that are inherited for the A, B, and AB blood types encode enzymes that add the carbohydrate component to the protein receptor. Individuals with O blood type still have the protein receptor but lack the enzymes that would add carbohydrates that would make their red blood cell type A, B, or AB.

IgM antibodies in plasma that cross-react with blood group antigens not present on an individual’s own RBCs are called  **isohemagglutinin**s ({'Figure_19_1_ABO Figure 19.1.ABO}). Isohemagglutinins are produced within the first few weeks after birth and persist throughout life. These antibodies are produced in response to exposure to environmental antigens from food and microorganisms. A person with type A blood has A antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-B antibodies to environmental antigens that resemble the carbohydrate component of B antigens. A person with type B blood has B antigens on the surface of their RBCs and will produce anti-A antibodies to environmental antigens that are similar to the carbohydrate component of A antigens. People with blood type O lack both A and B antigens on their RBCs and, therefore, produce both anti-A and anti-B antibodies. Conversely, people with AB blood type have both A and B antigens on their RBCs and, therefore, lack anti-A and anti-B antibodies.


{image:'Figure_19_1_ABO}
        

A patient may require a  **blood transfusion** because they lack sufficient RBCs ( **anemia**) or because they have experienced significant loss of blood volume through trauma or disease. Although the blood transfusion is given to help the patient, it is essential that the patient receive a transfusion with matching ABO blood type. A transfusion with an incompatible ABO blood type may lead to a strong, potentially lethal type II hypersensitivity cytotoxic response called  **hemolytic transfusion reaction (HTR)** ({'Figure_19_1_HTR Figure 19.1.HTR}).

For instance, if a person with type B blood receives a transfusion of type A blood, their anti-A antibodies will bind to and  **agglutinate** the transfused RBCs. In addition, activation of the  **classical complement cascade** will lead to a strong inflammatory response, and the complement  **membrane attack complex (MAC)** will mediate massive  **hemolysis** of the transfused RBCs. The debris from damaged and destroyed RBCs can occlude blood vessels in the alveoli of the lungs and the glomeruli of the kidneys. Within 1 to 24 hours of an incompatible transfusion, the patient experiences fever, chills, pruritus (itching), urticaria (hives), dyspnea, hemoglobinuria (hemoglobin in the urine), and hypotension (low blood pressure). In the most serious reactions, dangerously low blood pressure can lead to shock, multi-organ failure, and death of the patient.

Hospitals, medical centers, and associated clinical laboratories typically use  **hemovigilance systems** to minimize the risk of HTRs due to clerical error. Hemovigilance systems are procedures that track transfusion information from the donor source and blood products obtained to the follow-up of recipient patients. Hemovigilance systems used in many countries identify HTRs and their outcomes through mandatory reporting (e.g., to the Food and Drug Administration in the United States), and this information is valuable to help prevent such occurrences in the future. For example, if an HTR is found to be the result of laboratory or clerical error, additional blood products collected from the donor at that time can be located and labeled correctly to avoid additional HTRs. As a result of these measures, HTR-associated deaths in the United States occur in about one per 2 million transfused units.


{image:'Figure_19_1_HTR}
        

## Rh Factors

Many different types of  **erythrocyte antigen**s have been discovered since the description of the ABO red cell antigens. The second most frequently described RBC antigens are  **Rh factor**s, named after the rhesus macaque ( *Macaca mulatta*) factors identified by Karl  **Landsteiner** and Alexander  **Weiner** in 1940. The Rh system of RBC antigens is the most complex and immunogenic blood group system, with more than 50 specificities identified to date. Of all the Rh antigens, the one designated Rho (Weiner) or D (Fisher-Race) is the most immunogenic. Cells are classified as Rh positive (Rh+) if the  **Rho/D antigen** is present or as Rh negative (Rh−) if the Rho/D antigen is absent. In contrast to the carbohydrate molecules that distinguish the ABO blood groups and are the targets of IgM isohemagglutinins in HTRs, the Rh factor antigens are proteins. As discussed in <link:>, protein antigens activate B cells and antibody production through a T-cell–dependent mechanism, and the T<sub>H</sub>2 cells stimulate class switching from IgM to other antibody classes. In the case of Rh factor antigens, T<sub>H</sub>2 cells stimulate class switching to IgG, and this has important implications for the mechanism of HDN.

Like ABO incompatibilities,  **blood transfusion**s from a donor with the wrong Rh factor antigens can cause a type II hypersensitivity HTR. However, in contrast to the IgM isohemagglutinins produced early in life through exposure to environmental antigens, production of  **anti-Rh factor antibodies** requires the exposure of an individual with Rh− blood to Rh+ positive RBCs and activation of a primary antibody response. Although this primary antibody response can cause an HTR in the transfusion patient, the  **hemolytic reaction** would be delayed up to 2 weeks during the extended  **lag period** of a  **primary antibody response** (<link:>). However, if the patient receives a subsequent transfusion with Rh+ RBCs, a more rapid HTR would occur with anti-Rh factor antibody already present in the blood. Furthermore, the rapid  **secondary antibody response** would provide even more anti-Rh factor antibodies for the HTR.

Rh factor incompatibility between mother and fetus can also cause a type II hypersensitivity hemolytic reaction, referred to as  **hemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN)** ({'Figure_19_1_HDN Figure 19.1.HDN}). If an Rh− woman carries an Rh+ baby to term, the mother’s immune system can be exposed to  **Rh+ fetal red blood cells**. This exposure will usually occur during the last trimester of pregnancy and during the delivery process. If this exposure occurs, the Rh+ fetal RBCs will activate a primary adaptive immune response in the mother, and anti-Rh factor IgG antibodies will be produced. IgG antibodies are the only class of antibody that can cross the placenta from mother to fetus; however, in most cases, the first Rh+ baby is unaffected by these antibodies because the first exposure typically occurs late enough in the pregnancy that the mother does not have time to mount a sufficient primary antibody response before the baby is born.

If a subsequent  **pregnancy** with an Rh+ fetus occurs, however, the mother’s second exposure to the Rh factor antigens causes a strong secondary antibody response that produces larger quantities of anti-Rh factor IgG. These antibodies can cross the placenta from mother to fetus and cause HDN, a potentially lethal condition for the baby ({'Figure_19_1_HDN Figure 19.1.HDN}).

Prior to the development of techniques for diagnosis and prevention, Rh factor incompatibility was the most common cause of HDN, resulting in thousands of infant deaths each year worldwide. For this reason, the Rh factors of prospective parents are regularly screened, and treatments have been developed to prevent HDN caused by Rh incompatibility. To prevent Rh factor-mediated HDN,  **human Rho(D) immune globulin** (e.g.,  **RhoGAM**) is injected intravenously or intramuscularly into the mother during the 28th week of pregnancy and within 72 hours after delivery. Additional doses may be administered after events that may result in transplacental hemorrhage (e.g., umbilical blood sampling, chorionic villus sampling, abdominal trauma, amniocentesis). This treatment is initiated during the first pregnancy with an Rh+ fetus. The anti-Rh antibodies in Rho(D) immune globulin will bind to the Rh factor of any fetal RBCs that gain access to the mother’s bloodstream, preventing these Rh+ cells from activating the mother’s primary antibody response. Without a primary anti-Rh factor antibody response, the next pregnancy with an Rh+ will have minimal risk of HDN. However, the mother will need to be retreated with Rho(D) immune globulin during that pregnancy to prevent a primary anti-Rh antibody response that could threaten subsequent pregnancies.


{image:'Figure_19_1_HDN}
        
