Although each element has a unique number of protons, it can exist as different isotopes. An  **isotope** is one of the different forms of an element, distinguished from one another by different numbers of neutrons. The standard isotope of carbon is <sup>12</sup>C, commonly called carbon twelve. <sup>12</sup>C has six protons and six neutrons, for a mass number of twelve. All of the isotopes of carbon have the same number of protons; therefore,<sup> 13</sup>C has seven neutrons, and <sup>14</sup>C has eight neutrons. The different isotopes of an element can also be indicated with the mass number hyphenated (for example, C-12 instead of <sup>12</sup>C). Hydrogen has three common isotopes, shown in {'Figure_2_1_4 Figure 2.1.4}.

{image:'Figure_2_1_4}

An isotope that contains more than the usual number of neutrons is referred to as a heavy isotope. An example is <sup>14</sup>C. Heavy isotopes tend to be unstable, and unstable isotopes are radioactive. A  **radioactive isotope** is an isotope whose nucleus readily decays, giving off subatomic particles and electromagnetic energy. Different radioactive isotopes (also called radioisotopes) differ in their half-life, the time it takes for half of any size sample of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of tritium—a radioisotope of hydrogen—is about 12 years, indicating it takes 12 years for half of the tritium nuclei in a sample to decay. Excessive exposure to radioactive isotopes can damage human cells and even cause cancer and birth defects, but when exposure is controlled, some radioactive isotopes can be useful in medicine.
