index: hide
name: Oxidation-Reduction Reactions

The chemical reactions underlying metabolism involve the transfer of electrons from one compound to another by processes catalyzed by enzymes. The electrons in these reactions commonly come from hydrogen atoms, which consist of an electron and a proton. A molecule gives up a hydrogen atom, in the form of a hydrogen ion (H<sup>+</sup>) and an electron, breaking the molecule into smaller parts. The loss of an electron, or  **oxidation**, releases a small amount of energy; both the electron and the energy are then passed to another molecule in the process of  **reduction**, or the gaining of an electron. These two reactions always happen together in an  **oxidation-reduction reaction** (also called a redox reaction)—when an electron is passed between molecules, the donor is oxidized and the recipient is reduced. Oxidation-reduction reactions often happen in a series, so that a molecule that is reduced is subsequently oxidized, passing on not only the electron it just received but also the energy it received. As the series of reactions progresses, energy accumulates that is used to combine P<sub>i</sub> and ADP to form ATP, the high-energy molecule that the body uses for fuel.

Oxidation-reduction reactions are catalyzed by enzymes that trigger the removal of hydrogen atoms. Coenzymes work with enzymes and accept hydrogen atoms. The two most common coenzymes of oxidation-reduction reactions are  **nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD)** and  **flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD)**. Their respective reduced coenzymes are  **NADH** and  **FADH2**, which are energy-containing molecules used to transfer energy during the creation of ATP.
