index: hide
name: Spectrum of Activity

The spectrum of activity of an antibacterial drug relates to diversity of targeted bacteria. A  **narrow-spectrum antimicrobial** targets only specific subsets of bacterial pathogens. For example, some narrow-spectrum drugs only target  **gram-positive bacteria**, whereas others target only  **gram-negative bacteria**. If the pathogen causing an infection has been identified, it is best to use a narrow-spectrum antimicrobial and minimize collateral damage to the normal microbiota. A  **broad-spectrum antimicrobial** targets a wide variety of bacterial pathogens, including both gram-positive and gram-negative species, and is frequently used as empiric therapy to cover a wide range of potential pathogens while waiting on the laboratory identification of the infecting pathogen. Broad-spectrum antimicrobials are also used for  **polymicrobic infections** (mixed infection with multiple bacterial species), or as prophylactic prevention of infections with surgery/invasive procedures. Finally, broad-spectrum antimicrobials may be selected to treat an infection when a narrow-spectrum drug fails because of development of drug resistance by the target pathogen.

The risk associated with using broad-spectrum antimicrobials is that they will also target a broad spectrum of the normal microbiota, increasing the risk of a  **superinfection**, a secondary infection in a patient having a preexisting infection. A superinfection develops when the antibacterial intended for the preexisting infection kills the protective  **microbiota**, allowing another pathogen resistant to the antibacterial to proliferate and cause a secondary infection ({'Figure_14_4_Supinfect Figure 14.4.Supinfect}). Common examples of superinfections that develop as a result of antimicrobial usage include yeast infections ( **candidiasis**) and  **pseudomembranous colitis** caused by  **Clostridium difficile**, which can be fatal.


{image:'Figure_14_4_Supinfect}
        
