index: hide
name: Diversity of Angiosperms

Angiosperms are classified in a single phylum: the  **Anthophyta**. Modern angiosperms appear to be a monophyletic group, which as you may recall means that they originated from a single ancestor. Within the angiosperms are three major groups: basal angiosperms, monocots, and dicots. Basal angiosperms are a group of plants that are believed to have branched off before the separation of the monocots and eudicots, because they exhibit traits from both groups. They are categorized separately in most classification schemes. The basal angiosperms include  *Amborella*, water lilies, the Magnoliids (magnolia trees, laurels, and spice peppers), and a group called the Austrobaileyales, which includes the star anise. The monocots and dicots are differentiated on the basis of the structure of the cotyledons, pollen grains, and other structures. Monocots include grasses and lilies, and the dicots form a multi-branched group that includes (among many others) roses, cabbages, sunflowers, and mints.

## Basal Angiosperms

The Magnoliidae are represented by the magnolias, laurels, and peppers. Magnolias are tall trees bearing dark, shiny leaves, and large, fragrant flowers with many parts, and are considered archaic ({'Figure_26_5 Figure 26.5}). In the outer whorl of the magnolia flower the sepals and petals are undifferentiated and are collectively called tepals. The reproductive parts are arranged in a spiral around a cone-shaped receptacle, with the carpels located above the stamens ({'Figure_26_5 Figure 26.5}). The aggregate fruit, with one seed formed from each carpel, is seen in {'Figure_B26_3_4 Figure B26.3.4} **d**. Laurel trees produce fragrant leaves and small, inconspicuous flowers. The  *Laurales* grow mostly in warmer climates and are small trees and shrubs. Familiar plants in this group include the bay laurel, cinnamon, spice bush ({'Figure_B26_3_4 Figure B26.3.4} **a**), and avocado tree.


{image:'Figure_26_5}
        


{image:'Figure_B26_3_4}
        

## Monocots

Plants in the  **monocot** group are primarily identified by the presence of a single cotyledon in the seedling. Other anatomical features shared by monocots include veins that run parallel to and along the length of the leaves, and flower parts that are arranged in a three- or six-fold symmetry.  *True* *woody tissue* is rarely found in monocots. In palm trees, vascular and parenchyma tissues produced by the primary and secondary thickening meristems form the trunk. The pollen from the first angiosperms was likely  **monosulcate**, containing a single furrow or pore through the outer layer. This feature is still seen in the modern monocots. Vascular tissue of the stem is scattered, not arranged in any particular pattern, but is organized in a ring in the roots. The root system consists of multiple fibrous roots, with no major tap root.  *Adventitious roots* often emerge from the stem or leaves. The monocots include familiar plants such as the true lilies (Liliopsida), orchids, yucca, asparagus, grasses, and palms. Many important crops are monocots, such as rice and other cereals, corn, sugar cane, and tropical fruits like bananas and pineapples ({'Figure_26_3_5 Figure 26.3.5} **a**, **b**, **c**).


{image:'Figure_26_3_5}
        

## Eudicots

Eudicots, or true  **dicots**, are characterized by the presence of two cotyledons in the developing shoot. Veins form a network in leaves, and flower parts come in four, five, or many whorls. Vascular tissue forms a ring in the stem; in monocots, vascular tissue is scattered in the stem. Eudicots can be  **herbaceous** (not woody), or produce woody tissues. Most eudicots produce pollen that is trisulcate or triporate, with three furrows or pores. The root system is usually anchored by one main root developed from the embryonic radicle. Eudicots comprise two-thirds of all flowering plants. The major differences between monocots and eudicots are summarized in . However, some species may exhibit characteristics usually associated with the other group, so identification of a plant as a monocot or a eudicot is not always straightforward.


****

| Characteristic | Monocot | Eudicot |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Cotyledon | One | Two |
| Veins in Leaves | Parallel | Network (branched) |
| Stem Vascular Tissue | Scattered | Arranged in ring pattern |
| Roots | Network of fibrous roots | Tap root with many lateral roots |
| Pollen | Monosulcate | Trisulcate |
| Flower Parts | Three or multiple of three | Four, five, multiple of four or five and whorls |
    
