index: hide
name: Flowers

Flowers are modified leaves, or sporophylls, organized around a central receptacle. Although they vary greatly in appearance, virtually all flowers contain the same structures: sepals, petals, carpels, and stamens. The peduncle typically attaches the flower to the plant proper. A whorl of  **sepals** (collectively called the  **calyx**) is located at the base of the peduncle and encloses the unopened floral bud. Sepals are usually photosynthetic organs, although there are some exceptions. For example, the corolla in lilies and tulips consists of three sepals and three petals that look virtually identical.  **Petals**, collectively the  **corolla**, are located inside the whorl of sepals and may display vivid colors to attract pollinators. Sepals and petals together form the  **perianth**. The sexual organs, the  *female gynoecium* and  *male androecium* are located at the center of the flower. Typically, the sepals, petals, and stamens are attached to the receptacle at the base of the gynoecium, but the gynoecium may also be located deeper in the receptacle, with the other floral structures attached above it.

As illustrated in {'Figure_26_3_2 Figure 26.3.2}, the innermost part of a perfect flower is the  **gynoecium**, the location in the flower where the eggs will form. The female reproductive unit consists of one or more carpels, each of which has a stigma, style, and ovary. The  **stigma** is the location where the pollen is deposited either by wind or a pollinating arthropod. The sticky surface of the stigma traps pollen grains, and the  **style** is a connecting structure through which the pollen tube will grow to reach the ovary. The  **ovary** houses one or more ovules, each of which will ultimately develop into a  **seed**. Flower structure is very diverse, and carpels may be singular, multiple, or fused. (Multiple fused carpels comprise a  **pistil**.) The  **androecium**, or male reproductive region is composed of multiple stamens surrounding the central carpel.  **Stamens** are composed of a thin stalk called a  **filament** and a sac-like structure called the  **anther**. The filament supports the anther, where the microspores are produced by meiosis and develop into haploid pollen grains, or male gametophytes.


{image:'Figure_26_3_2}
        
