index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Viruses cause respiratory tract infections more frequently than bacteria, and most viral infections lead to mild symptoms.
  * The  **common cold** can be caused by more than 200 viruses, typically rhinoviruses, coronaviruses, and adenoviruses, transmitted by direct contact, aerosols, or environmental surfaces.
  * Due to its ability to rapidly mutate through  **antigenic drift** and  **antigenic shift**,  **influenza** remains an important threat to human health. Two new influenza vaccines are developed annually.
  * Several viral infections, including  **respiratory**  **syncytial**  **virus** infections, which frequently occur in the very young, can begin with mild symptoms before progressing to viral pneumonia.
  *  **SARS** and  **MERS** are acute respiratory infections caused by coronaviruses, and both appear to originate in animals. SARS has not been seen in the human population since 2004 but had a high mortality rate during its outbreak. MERS also has a high mortality rate and continues to appear in human populations.
  *  **Measles**,  **rubella**, and  **chickenpox** are highly contagious, systemic infections that gain entry through the respiratory system and cause rashes and fevers. Vaccines are available for all three. Measles is the most severe of the three and is responsible for significant mortality around the world. Chickenpox typically causes mild infections in children but the virus can reactivate to cause painful cases of  **shingles** later in life.
