index: hide
name: Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci and Staphylococcus aureus

# Vancomycin-Resistant Enterococci and  *Staphylococcus aureus*

Vancomycin is only effective against gram-positive organisms, and it is used to treat wound infections, septic infections, endocarditis, and meningitis that are caused by pathogens resistant to other antibiotics. It is considered one of the last lines of defense against such resistant infections, including MRSA. With the rise of antibiotic resistance in the 1970s and 1980s, vancomycin use increased, and it is not surprising that we saw the emergence and spread of  **vancomycin-resistant enterococci (VRE)**,  **vancomycin-resistant S. aureus (VRSA)**, and  **vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (VISA)**. The mechanism of vancomycin resistance among enterococci is target modification involving a structural change to the peptide component of the peptidoglycan subunits, preventing vancomycin from binding. These strains are typically spread among patients in clinical settings by contact with health-care workers and contaminated surfaces and medical equipment.

VISA and VRSA strains differ from each other in the mechanism of resistance and the degree of resistance each mechanism confers. VISA strains exhibit intermediate resistance, with a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of 4–8 μg/mL, and the mechanism involves an increase in vancomycin targets. VISA strains decrease the crosslinking of peptide chains in the cell wall, providing an increase in vancomycin targets that trap vancomycin in the outer cell wall. In contrast, VRSA strains acquire vancomycin resistance through horizontal transfer of resistance genes from VRE, an opportunity provided in individuals coinfected with both VRE and MRSA. VRSA exhibit a higher level of resistance, with MICs of 16 μg/mL or higher. In the case of all three types of vancomycin-resistant bacteria, rapid clinical identification is necessary so proper procedures to limit spread can be implemented. The  **oxazolidinones** like  **linezolid** are useful for the treatment of these vancomycin-resistant, opportunistic pathogens, as well as MRSA.
