index: hide
name: Class Hydrozoa

Hydrozoa is a diverse group that includes nearly 3,200 species; most are marine, although some freshwater species are known ({'Figure_28_2_8abcd Figure 28.2.8abcd}). Most species exhibit both polypoid and medusoid forms in their lifecycles, although the familiar  *Hydra* has only the polyp form. The medusoid form has a muscular veil or  **velum** below the margin of the bell and for this reason is called a  *hydromedusa*. In contrast, the medusoid form of Scyphozoa lacks a velum and is termed a  *scyphomedusa*.

The polyp form in these animals often shows a cylindrical morphology with a central gastrovascular cavity lined by the gastrodermis. The gastrodermis and epidermis have a simple layer of mesoglea sandwiched between them. A mouth opening, surrounded by tentacles, is present at the oral end of the animal. Many hydrozoans form sessile, branched colonies of specialized polyps that share a common, branching gastrovascular cavity (coenosarc), such as is found in the colonial hydroid  *Obelia*.

Free-floating colonial species called  **siphonophores** contain both medusoid and polypoid individuals that are specialized for feeding, defense, or reproduction. The distinctive rainbow-hued float of the Portuguese man o’ war ( *Physalia physalis*) creates a pneumatophore with which it regulates buoyancy by filling and expelling carbon monoxide gas. At first glance, these complex superorganisms appear to be a single organism; but the reality is that even the tentacles are actually composed of zooids laden with nematocysts. Thus, although it superficially resembles a typical medusozoan jellyfish,  *P. physalis*is a free-floating hydrozoan  *colony*; each specimen is made up of many hundreds of organisms, each specialized for a certain function, including motility and buoyancy, feeding, reproduction and defense. Although they are carnivorous and feed on many soft bodied marine animals,  *P. physalis* lack stomachs and instead have specialized polyps called gastrozooids that they use to digest their prey in the open water.

 *Physalia* has male and female colonies, which release their gametes into the water. The zygote develops into a single individual, which then buds asexually to form a new colony. Siphonophores include the largest known floating cnidarian colonies such as *Praya dubia*, whose chain of zoids can get up to 50 meters (165 feet) long. Other hydrozoan species are solitary polyps ( *Hydra*) or solitary hydromedusae ( *Gonionemus*). One defining characteristic shared by the hydrozoans is that their gonads are derived from epidermal tissue, whereas in all other cnidarians they are derived from gastrodermal tissue.


{image:'Figure_28_2_8abcd}
        
