index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.4.2
title: 8.3.4.2 - Radiation Forcing of the Aerosol–Radiation Interaction by Component

Based on a combination of global {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} models and observation-based methods, the best {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF} estimate of the {Glossary.*Aerosol_radiation_interaction aerosol–radiation interaction} in AR5 is –0.35 (–0.85 to +0.15) W m–2 (see {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5}). This estimate is thus smaller in magnitude than in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, however; with larger uncertainty range. Overall, the estimate compared to AR4 is more robust because the agreement between estimates from models and observation-based methods is much greater (see {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5}). The larger range arises primarily from analysis by observation-based methods (see {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5}).

The main {Glossary.*Source source} of the model estimate is based on updated simulations in AeroCom ({cite.8.'Myhre_et_al_2013}), which is an intercomparison exercise of a large set of global aerosol models that includes extensive evaluation against measurements. The assessment in {Chapters.7 Chapter 7} relies to a large extent on this study for the separation in the various aerosol components, except for {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} where the assessment in {Chapters.7 Chapter 7} relies in addition on {cite.8.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)}. The RF of aerosol–radiation interaction is separated into seven components in this report; namely sulphate, BC from fossil fuel and biofuel, OA from fossil fuel and biofuel, BC and OA combined from {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} burning (BB), nitrate, SOA and mineral dust. BC and OA from biomass burning are combined due to the joint sources, whereas treated separately for fossil fuel and biofuel because there is larger variability in the ratio of BC to OA in the fossil fuel and biofuel emissions. This approach is consistent with {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} and AR4. {'Table_8_4 Table 8.4} compares the best estimates of RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction for various components in this report with values in {cite.1.'IPCC_1996 SAR}, TAR and AR4. In magnitude the sulphate and BC from use of fossil fuel and biofuel dominate. It is important to note that the BB RF is small in magnitude but consists of larger, offsetting terms in magnitude from OA and BC (see {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_2 Section 7.5.2}). Changes in the estimates of RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction of the various components have been rather modest compared to AR4, except for BC from fossil fuel and biofuel (see {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5}). SOA is a new component compared to AR4. {Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} SOA {Glossary.*Precursors precursors} contribute only modestly to the anthropogenic change in SOA. The increase in SOA is mostly from biogenic precursors and enhanced partitioning of SOA into existing particles from anthropogenic sources and changes in the atmospheric oxidation ({cite.8.'Carlton_et_al_2010}). This change in SOA is therefore of anthropogenic origin, but natural emission of SOA precursors is important ({cite.8.'Hoyle_et_al_2011}).

{table:'Table_8_4}

Note that the best estimate and the uncertainty for the total is not equal to the sum of the aerosol components because the total is estimated based on a combination of methods (models and observation-based methods), whereas the estimates for the components rely mostly on model estimates.

The RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction during some time periods is more uncertain than the current RF. Improvements in the observations of aerosols have been substantial with availability of remote sensing from the ground-based optical observational network AErosol RObotic NETwork (AERONET) and the launch of the Moderate {Glossary.*Resolution Resolution} Imaging Spectrometer (MODIS) and Multi-angle Imaging Spectro-Radiometer (MISR) instruments (starting in 2000) as well as other satellite data. This has contributed to constraining the current RF using aerosol observations. The aerosol observations are very limited backward in time, although there is growing constraint coming from new ice and lake core records, and {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in the historical emission of aerosols and their precursors used in the global aerosol modeling are larger than for current conditions. {Topics.*Emissions Emissions} of carbonaceous aerosols are particularly uncertain in the 1800s due to a significant biofuel source in this period, in contrast to the SO2 emissions which were very small until the end of the 1800s. The uncertainty in the biomass burning emissions also increases backward in time. Note that, for 1850, the biomass burning emissions from {cite.8.'Lamarque_et_al_2010 Lamarque et al. (2010)} are quite different from the previous estimates, but RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction is close to zero for this component. {'Figure_8_8 Figure 8.8} shows an example of the time evolution of the RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction as a total and separated into six aerosol components. From 1950 to 1990 there was a strengthening of the total RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction, mainly due to a strong enhancement of the sulphate RF. After 1990 the change has been small with even a weakening of the RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction, mainly due to a stronger BC RF as a result of increased emissions in East and Southeast Asia.

{image:'Figure_8_8}
