index: hide
name: The Cell Cycle

One “turn” or cycle of the cell cycle consists of two general phases: interphase, followed by mitosis and cytokinesis.  **Interphase** is the period of the cell cycle during which the cell is not dividing. The majority of cells are in interphase most of the time.  **Mitosis** is the division of genetic material, during which the cell nucleus breaks down and two new, fully functional, nuclei are formed.  **Cytokinesis** divides the cytoplasm into two distinctive cells.

## Interphase

A cell grows and carries out all normal metabolic functions and processes in a period called G<sub>1</sub> ({'Figure_3_5_1 Figure 3.5.1}).  **G1 phase** (gap 1 phase) is the first gap, or growth phase in the cell cycle. For cells that will divide again, G<sub>1</sub> is followed by replication of the DNA, during the S phase. The  **S phase** (synthesis phase) is period during which a cell replicates its DNA.


{image:'Figure_3_5_1}
        

After the synthesis phase, the cell proceeds through the G<sub>2</sub> phase. The  **G2 phase** is a second gap phase, during which the cell continues to grow and makes the necessary preparations for mitosis. Between G<sub>1</sub>, S, and G<sub>2</sub> phases, cells will vary the most in their duration of the G1 phase. It is here that a cell might spend a couple of hours, or many days. The S phase typically lasts between 8-10 hours and the G<sub>2</sub> phase approximately 5 hours. In contrast to these phases, the  **G0 phase** is a resting phase of the cell cycle. Cells that have temporarily stopped dividing and are resting (a common condition) and cells that have permanently ceased dividing (like nerve cells) are said to be in G<sub>0</sub>.

## The Structure of Chromosomes

Billions of cells in the human body divide every day. During the synthesis phase (S, for DNA synthesis) of interphase, the amount of DNA within the cell precisely doubles. Therefore, after DNA replication but before cell division, each cell actually contains  *two*copies of each chromosome. Each copy of the chromosome is referred to as a  **sister chromatid** and is physically bound to the other copy. The  **centromere** is the structure that attaches one sister chromatid to another. Because a human cell has 46 chromosomes, during this phase, there are 92 chromatids (46 × 2) in the cell. Make sure not to confuse the concept of a pair of chromatids (one chromosome and its exact copy attached during mitosis) and a homologous pair of chromosomes (two paired chromosomes which were inherited separately, one from each parent) ({'Figure_3_5_2 Figure 3.5.2}).


{image:'Figure_3_5_2}
        

## Mitosis and Cytokinesis

The  **mitotic phase** of the cell typically takes between 1 and 2 hours. During this phase, a cell undergoes two major processes. First, it completes mitosis, during which the contents of the nucleus are equitably pulled apart and distributed between its two halves. Cytokinesis then occurs, dividing the cytoplasm and cell body into two new cells. Mitosis is divided into four major stages that take place after interphase ({'Figure_3_5_3 Figure 3.5.3}) and in the following order: prophase, metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. The process is then followed by cytokinesis.


{image:'Figure_3_5_3}
        

 **Prophase** is the first phase of mitosis, during which the loosely packed chromatin coils and condenses into visible chromosomes. During prophase, each chromosome becomes visible with its identical partner attached, forming the familiar X-shape of sister chromatids. The nucleolus disappears early during this phase, and the nuclear envelope also disintegrates.

A major occurrence during prophase concerns a very important structure that contains the origin site for microtubule growth. Recall the cellular structures called centrioles that serve as origin points from which microtubules extend. These tiny structures also play a very important role during mitosis. A  **centrosome** is a pair of centrioles together. The cell contains two centrosomes side-by-side, which begin to move apart during prophase. As the centrosomes migrate to two different sides of the cell, microtubules begin to extend from each like long fingers from two hands extending toward each other. The  **mitotic spindle** is the structure composed of the centrosomes and their emerging microtubules.

Near the end of prophase there is an invasion of the nuclear area by microtubules from the mitotic spindle. The nuclear membrane has disintegrated, and the microtubules attach themselves to the centromeres that adjoin pairs of sister chromatids. The  **kinetochore** is a protein structure on the centromere that is the point of attachment between the mitotic spindle and the sister chromatids. This stage is referred to as late prophase or “prometaphase” to indicate the transition between prophase and metaphase.

 **Metaphase** is the second stage of mitosis. During this stage, the sister chromatids, with their attached microtubules, line up along a linear plane in the middle of the cell. A metaphase plate forms between the centrosomes that are now located at either end of the cell. The  **metaphase plate** is the name for the plane through the center of the spindle on which the sister chromatids are positioned. The microtubules are now poised to pull apart the sister chromatids and bring one from each pair to each side of the cell.

 **Anaphase** is the third stage of mitosis. Anaphase takes place over a few minutes, when the pairs of sister chromatids are separated from one another, forming individual chromosomes once again. These chromosomes are pulled to opposite ends of the cell by their kinetochores, as the microtubules shorten. Each end of the cell receives one partner from each pair of sister chromatids, ensuring that the two new daughter cells will contain identical genetic material.

 **Telophase** is the final stage of mitosis. Telophase is characterized by the formation of two new daughter nuclei at either end of the dividing cell. These newly formed nuclei surround the genetic material, which uncoils such that the chromosomes return to loosely packed chromatin. Nucleoli also reappear within the new nuclei, and the mitotic spindle breaks apart, each new cell receiving its own complement of DNA, organelles, membranes, and centrioles. At this point, the cell is already beginning to split in half as cytokinesis begins.

The  **cleavage furrow** is a contractile band made up of microfilaments that forms around the midline of the cell during cytokinesis. (Recall that microfilaments consist of actin.) This contractile band squeezes the two cells apart until they finally separate. Two new cells are now formed. One of these cells (the “stem cell”) enters its own cell cycle; able to grow and divide again at some future time. The other cell transforms into the functional cell of the tissue, typically replacing an “old” cell there.

Imagine a cell that completed mitosis but never underwent cytokinesis. In some cases, a cell may divide its genetic material and grow in size, but fail to undergo cytokinesis. This results in larger cells with more than one nucleus. Usually this is an unwanted aberration and can be a sign of cancerous cells.
