index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.6.5
title: 13.6.5 - Regional Relative Sea Level Changes

Regional relative {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} can be estimated from a combination of the various contributions to {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} described above, emerging from the ocean, atmospheric pressure loading and the solid Earth.

Over the next few decades, regional relative sea level changes over most parts of the world are likely to be dominated by dynamical changes (mass redistribution and {Glossary.*Steric steric} components) resulting from natural variability, although exceptions are possible at sites near rapidly melting ice sheets where static effects could become large. However, towards the end of the 21st century, regional patterns in sea level from all other contributions will progressively emerge and eventually dominate over the natural variability.

{Glossary.*Ensemble Ensemble} mean estimates of relative sea level change during the period 2081–2100 relative to 1986–2000 resulting from {Glossary.*Glacial_isostatic_adjustment GIA} and from {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} and ice-sheet melting for RCP4.5 and {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} ({'Figure_13_18 Figure 13.18}) suggest that for the 21st century, past, present and future loss of land-ice mass will very likely be an important contributor to spatial patterns in relative sea level change, leading to rates of maximum rise at low-to-mid latitudes. {cite.13.'Hu_et_al_2011 Hu et al. (2011)} and {cite.13.'Sallenger_et_al_2012 Sallenger et al. (2012)} also suggested that steric and dynamical sea level changes can potentially increase the sea level near the northeastern coast of North America and in the western Pacific. Considerable {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} remain, however, in both the sea level budget and in the regional expression of sea level rise. In addition, local sea level rise can also partly be compensated by vertical land movement resulting from GIA, especially in some formerly glaciated high-latitude regions where high rates of land uplift may lead to a decrease of relative sea level. For example, Johansson et al. (2014) reported a 29 cm sea level rise in the Gulf of Finland and 27 cm fall in the Bay of Bothnia.

The ensemble mean regional relative sea level change between 1986–2005 and 2081–2100 for the RCP4.5 scenario (not including the dynamic ocean contribution in response to the influx of freshwater associated with land-ice loss and changes in terrestrial ground water) reveals that many regions are likely to experience regional sea level changes that differ substantially from the global mean ({'Figure_13_19 Figure 13.19}). {'Figure_13_20 Figure 13.20} shows ensemble mean regional relative sea level change between 1986–2005 and 2081–2100 for {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} 2.6, 6.0 and 8.5.

{image:'Figure_13_19}

{image:'Figure_13_20}

It is very likely that over about 95% of the world ocean, regional relative sea level rise will be positive, while most regions that will experience a sea level fall are located near current and former glaciers and ice sheets. {'Figure_13_21 Figure 13.21}b shows that over most of the oceans (except for limited regions around western Antarctica, Greenland, and high Arctic regions), estimated regional sea level changes are significant at the 90% confidence limit. Local sea level changes deviate more than 10% and 25% from the global mean {Glossary.*Projection projection} for as much as 30% and 9% of the ocean area, respectively, indicating that spatial variations can be large. Regional changes in sea level reach values of up to 30% above the global mean value in the Southern Ocean and around North America, between 10 and 20% in equatorial regions and up to 50% below the global mean in the Arctic {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} and some regions near Antarctica ({'Figure_13_21 Figure 13.21}a).

{image:'Figure_13_21}

{'Figure_13_22 Figure 13.22} shows that, between 1986–2005 and 2081–2100, sea level changes along the world’s coastlines associated with the RCP4.5 and RCP8.5 scenarios have a substantially skewed non-Gaussian distribution, with significant coastal deviations from the global mean. When the coastlines around Antarctica and Greenland are excluded ({'Figure_13_22 Figure 13.22}b), many negative changes disappear, but the general structures of the global histograms remain. In general, changes along the coastlines will range from about 30 cm to 55 cm for an RCP 4.5 scenario, peaking near 50 cm, and from about 40 cm to more than 80 cm under a RCP 8.5 scenario, peaking near 65 cm. About 68% and 72% of the coastlines will experience a relative sea level change within ±20% of the GMSL change for RCP4.5 and RCP8.5, respectively. In both cases, the maximum of the histogram is slightly higher than the GMSL, whereas the arithmetic mean is lower. Only some coastlines will experience a sea level rise of up to about 40% above GMSL change.

{image:'Figure_13_22}

{'Figure_13_23 Figure 13.23} shows the combination of the natural variability (annual mean) and the CMIP5 projected sea level rise for the RCP4.5 scenario for a number of locations distributed around the world. For example, at Pago Pago (14°S,195°E) in the western equatorial Pacific, the historical record indicates that annual variability in {Glossary.*Mean_sea_level mean sea level} has been about 21 cm (5 to 95% range). Projections by individual {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} indicate that it is very likely that a similar range of natural variability will continue through the 21st century ({'Figure_13_15 Figure 13.15}b). However, by 2100, the average projected sea level for the RCP4.5 scenario of 0.52 [0.32 to 0.70] m is greater than any observations of annual mean sea level in the instrumental record. Of all the examples shown, the greatest sea level increase will be in New York, which is representative of the enhanced sea level rise there due to ocean processes and GIA in the region (compare Figures {'Figure_13_16 13.16} and {'Figure_13_18 13.18}). The figure also reveals the large spatial inhomogeneity of interannual to decadal variability. In each case, monthly variability and extreme sea levels from winds and waves associated with weather phenomena ({Chapters.13.13_7 Section 13.7}) need to be considered in addition to these projections of regional sea level.

{image:'Figure_13_23}
