index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.5.4.1
title: 9.5.4.1 - Extreme Temperature

Since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, evaluation of CMIP3 and CMIP5 models has been undertaken with respect to {Topics.*Extreme_Events temperature extremes}. Both model ensembles simulate present-day warm extremes, in terms of 20-year return values, reasonably well, with errors typically within a few degrees Celsius over most of the globe ({cite.9.'Kharin_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Kharin_et_al_2012}). The CMIP5 and CMIP3 models perform comparably for various temperature extreme indices, but with smaller inter-{Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} in CMIP5. The inter-model range of simulated indices is similar to the spread amongst observationally based estimates in most regions ({cite.9.'Sillmann_et_al_2013}). {'Figure_9_37 Figure 9.37} shows relative error estimates of available CMIP5 models for various extreme indices based on {cite.9.'Sillmann_et_al_2013 Sillmann et al. (2013)}. Although the relative performance of an individual model may depend on the choice of the reference data set (four different reanalyses are used), the mean and median models tend to outperform individual models. According to the standardized multi-model median errors (RMSEstd) for CMIP3 and CMIP5 shown on the right side of {'Figure_9_37 Figure 9.37}, the performance of the two ensembles is similar.

{image:'Figure_9_37}

In terms of historical trends, CMIP3 and CMIP5 models generally capture observed trends in temperature extremes in the second half of the 20th century ({cite.9.'Sillmann_et_al_2013}), as illustrated in {'Figure_9_37 Figure 9.37}. The modelled trends are consistent with both reanalyses and station-based estimates. It is also clear in the figure that model-based indices respond coherently to major volcanic eruptions. {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution Detection} and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution studies} based on CMIP3 models suggest that models tend to overestimate the observed warming of warm temperature extremes and underestimate the warming of cold extremes in the second half of 20th century ({cite.9.'Christidis_et_al_2011}; {cite.9.'Zwiers_et_al_2011}) as noted in SREX ({cite.9.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}). See also {Chapters.10 Chapter 10}. This is not as obvious in the CMIP5 model evaluation ({'Figure_9_37 Figure 9.37} and {cite.9.'Sillmann_et_al_2013 Sillmann et al. (2013)}) and needs further investigation.
