index: hide
name: Applications

The fluoride ion and fluorine compounds have many important uses. Compounds of carbon, hydrogen, and fluorine are replacing Freons (compounds of carbon, chlorine, and fluorine) as refrigerants. Teflon is a polymer composed of –CF<sub>2</sub>CF<sub>2</sub>– units. Fluoride ion is added to water supplies and to some toothpastes as SnF<sub>2</sub> or NaF to fight tooth decay. Fluoride partially converts teeth from Ca<sub>5</sub>(PO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>3</sub>(OH) into Ca<sub>5</sub>(PO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>3</sub>F.

Chlorine is important to bleach wood pulp and cotton cloth. The chlorine reacts with water to form hypochlorous acid, which oxidizes colored substances to colorless ones. Large quantities of chlorine are important in chlorinating hydrocarbons (replacing hydrogen with chlorine) to produce compounds such as tetrachloride (CCl<sub>4</sub>), chloroform (CHCl<sub>3</sub>), and ethyl chloride (C<sub>2</sub>H<sub>5</sub>Cl), and in the production of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and other polymers. Chlorine is also important to kill the bacteria in community water supplies.

Bromine is important in the production of certain dyes, and sodium and potassium bromides are used as sedatives. At one time, light-sensitive silver bromide was a component of photographic film.

Iodine in alcohol solution with potassium iodide is an antiseptic (tincture of iodine). Iodide salts are essential for the proper functioning of the thyroid gland; an iodine deficiency may lead to the development of a goiter. Iodized table salt contains 0.023% potassium iodide. Silver iodide is useful in the seeding of clouds to induce rain; it was important in the production of photographic film and iodoform, CHI<sub>3</sub>, is an antiseptic.
