index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.2.1
title: 12.2.1 - The Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 and Other Tools

Many of the figures presented in this chapter and in others draw on data collected as part of CMIP5 ({cite.12.'Taylor_et_al_2012}). The project involves the worldwide coordination of {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESM} experiments including the coordination of input {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} fields, diagnostic output and the hosting of data in a distributed archive. CMIP5 has been unprecedented in terms of the number of modelling groups and models participating, the number of experiments performed and the number of diagnostics collected. The archive of model simulations began being populated by mid-2011 and continued to grow during the writing of AR5. The production of figures for this chapter draws on a fixed database of simulations and variables that was available on 15 March 2013 (the same as the cut-off date for the acceptance of the publication of papers). Different figures may use different subsets of models and there are unequal numbers of models that have produced output for the different RCP {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}. {'Figure_12_1 Figure 12.1} gives a summary of which output was available from which model for which scenario. Where multiple runs are performed with exactly the same model but with different initial conditions, we choose only one {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} member (usually the first but in cases where that was not available, the first available member is chosen) in order not to weight models with more ensemble members than others unduly in the multi-model synthesis. Rather than give an exhaustive account of which models were used to make which figures, this summary information is presented as a guide to readers.

{image:'Figure_12_1}

In addition to output from CMIP5, information from a coordinated set of simulations with {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs} is also used ({cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2013}) to investigate long-term climate change beyond 2100. Even more simplified {Glossary.*Energy_Balance_Model energy balance models} or emulation techniques are also used, mostly to estimate responses where ESM experiments are not available ({cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011a}; {cite.12.'Good_et_al_2013}). An evaluation of the models used for {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} is provided in {Chapters.9 Chapter 9} of this Report.
