index: hide
name: The Naming of Complexes

The nomenclature of the complexes is patterned after a system suggested by Alfred Werner, a Swiss chemist and Nobel laureate, whose outstanding work more than 100 years ago laid the foundation for a clearer understanding of these compounds. The following five rules are used for naming complexes:

  1. If a coordination compound is ionic, name the cation first and the anion second, in accordance with the usual nomenclature.
  2. Name the ligands first, followed by the central metal. Name the ligands alphabetically. Negative ligands (anions) have names formed by adding - *o* to the stem name of the group. For examples, see . For most neutral ligands, the name of the molecule is used. The four common exceptions are  *aqua* (H<sub>2</sub>O),  *ammine* (NH<sub>3</sub>),  *carbonyl* (CO), and  *nitrosyl* (NO). For example, name [Pt(NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>Cl<sub>4</sub>] as diamminetetrachloroplatinum(IV). &lt;table&gt;
  3. If more than one ligand of a given type is present, the number is indicated by the prefixes  *di*- (for two),  *tri*- (for three),  *tetra*- (for four),  *penta*- (for five), and  *hexa*- (for six). Sometimes, the prefixes  *bis*- (for two),  *tris*- (for three), and  *tetrakis*- (for four) are used when the name of the ligand already includes  *di*-,  *tri*-, or  *tetra*-, or when the ligand name begins with a vowel. For example, the ion bis(bipyridyl)osmium(II) uses bis- to signify that there are two ligands attached to Os, and each bipyridyl ligand contains two pyridine groups (C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>4</sub>N).

When the complex is either a cation or a neutral molecule, the name of the central metal atom is spelled exactly like the name of the element and is followed by a Roman numeral in parentheses to indicate its oxidation state ( and ). When the complex is an anion, the suffix -ate is added to the stem of the name of the metal, followed by the Roman numeral designation of its oxidation state (). Sometimes, the Latin name of the metal is used when the English name is clumsy. For example,  *ferrate* is used instead of  *ironate*,  *plumbate* instead  *leadate*, and  *stannate* instead of  *tinate*. The oxidation state of the metal is determined based on the charges of each ligand and the overall charge of the coordination compound. For example, in [Cr(H<sub>2</sub>O)<sub>4</sub>Cl<sub>2</sub>]Br, the coordination sphere (in brackets) has a charge of 1+ to balance the bromide ion. The water ligands are neutral, and the chloride ligands are anionic with a charge of 1− each. To determine the oxidation state of the metal, we set the overall charge equal to the sum of the ligands and the metal: +1 = −2 +  *x*, so the oxidation state ( *x*) is equal to 3+.


| Examples in Which the Complex Is a Cation |
|:-:|
| [Co(NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>6</sub>]Cl<sub>3</sub> | hexaamminecobalt(III) chloride |
| [Pt(NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>4</sub>Cl<sub>2</sub>]<sup>2+</sup> | tetraamminedichloroplatinum(IV) ion |
| [Ag(NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>]<sup>+</sup> | diamminesilver(I) ion |
| [Cr(H<sub>2</sub>O)<sub>4</sub>Cl<sub>2</sub>]Cl | tetraaquadichlorochromium(III) chloride |
| [Co(H<sub>2</sub>NCH<sub>2</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>NH<sub>2</sub>)<sub>3</sub>]<sub>2</sub>(SO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>3</sub> | tris(ethylenediamine)cobalt(III) sulfate |
    


| Examples in Which the Complex Is Neutral |
|:-:|
| [Pt(NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>Cl<sub>4</sub>] | diamminetetrachloroplatinum(IV) |
| [Ni(H<sub>2</sub>NCH<sub>2</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>NH<sub>2</sub>)<sub>2</sub>Cl<sub>2</sub>] | dichlorobis(ethylenediamine)nickel(II) |
    


| Examples in Which the Complex Is an Anion |
|:-:|
| [PtCl<sub>6</sub>]<sup>2−</sup> | hexachloroplatinate(IV) ion |
| Na<sub>2</sub>[SnCl<sub>6</sub>] | sodium hexachlorostannate(IV) |
    
