index: hide
name: Coordination Chemistry of Transition Metals - Introduction


{image:'Figure_19_2_ChlorBlue}
        

Many other coordination complexes are also brightly colored. The square planar copper(II) complex phthalocyanine blue (from {'Figure_19_2_ChlorBlue Figure 19.2.ChlorBlue}) is one of many complexes used as pigments or dyes. This complex is used in blue ink, blue jeans, and certain blue paints.

The structure of heme ({'Figure_19_2_heme2 Figure 19.2.heme2}), the iron-containing complex in hemoglobin, is very similar to that in chlorophyll. In hemoglobin, the red heme complex is bonded to a large protein molecule (globin) by the attachment of the protein to the heme ligand. Oxygen molecules are transported by hemoglobin in the blood by being bound to the iron center. When the hemoglobin loses its oxygen, the color changes to a bluish red. Hemoglobin will only transport oxygen if the iron is Fe<sup>2+</sup>; oxidation of the iron to Fe<sup>3+</sup> prevents oxygen transport.


{image:'Figure_19_2_heme2}
        

Complexing agents often are used for water softening because they tie up such ions as Ca<sup>2+</sup>, Mg<sup>2+</sup>, and Fe<sup>2+</sup>, which make water hard. Many metal ions are also undesirable in food products because these ions can catalyze reactions that change the color of food. Coordination complexes are useful as preservatives. For example, the ligand EDTA, (HO<sub>2</sub>CCH<sub>2</sub>)<sub>2</sub>NCH<sub>2</sub>CH<sub>2</sub>N(CH<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>2</sub>H)<sub>2</sub>, coordinates to metal ions through six donor atoms and prevents the metals from reacting ({'Figure_19_2_EDTA Figure 19.2.EDTA}). This ligand also is used to sequester metal ions in paper production, textiles, and detergents, and has pharmaceutical uses.


{image:'Figure_19_2_EDTA}
        

Complexing agents that tie up metal ions are also used as drugs. British Anti-Lewisite (BAL), HSCH<sub>2</sub>CH(SH)CH<sub>2</sub>OH, is a drug developed during World War I as an antidote for the arsenic-based war gas Lewisite. BAL is now used to treat poisoning by heavy metals, such as arsenic, mercury, thallium, and chromium. The drug is a ligand and functions by making a water-soluble chelate of the metal; the kidneys eliminate this metal chelate ({'Figure_19_2_BalEnt Figure 19.2.BalEnt}). Another polydentate ligand, enterobactin, which is isolated from certain bacteria, is used to form complexes of iron and thereby to control the severe iron buildup found in patients suffering from blood diseases such as Cooley’s anemia, who require frequent transfusions. As the transfused blood breaks down, the usual metabolic processes that remove iron are overloaded, and excess iron can build up to fatal levels. Enterobactin forms a water-soluble complex with excess iron, and the body can safely eliminate this complex.


{image:'Figure_19_2_BalEnt}
        

Ligands are also used in the electroplating industry. When metal ions are reduced to produce thin metal coatings, metals can clump together to form clusters and nanoparticles. When metal coordination complexes are used, the ligands keep the metal atoms isolated from each other. It has been found that many metals plate out as a smoother, more uniform, better-looking, and more adherent surface when plated from a bath containing the metal as a complex ion. Thus, complexes such as [Ag(CN)<sub>2</sub>]<sup>−</sup> and [Au(CN)<sub>2</sub>]<sup>−</sup> are used extensively in the electroplating industry.

In 1965, scientists at Michigan State University discovered that there was a platinum complex that inhibited cell division in certain microorganisms. Later work showed that the complex was  *cis*-diamminedichloroplatinum(II), [Pt(NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub>(Cl)<sub>2</sub>], and that the  *trans* isomer was not effective. The inhibition of cell division indicated that this square planar compound could be an anticancer agent. In 1978, the US Food and Drug Administration approved this compound, known as cisplatin, for use in the treatment of certain forms of cancer. Since that time, many similar platinum compounds have been developed for the treatment of cancer. In all cases, these are the  *cis* isomers and never the  *trans* isomers. The diammine (NH<sub>3</sub>)<sub>2</sub> portion is retained with other groups, replacing the dichloro [(Cl)<sub>2</sub>] portion. The newer drugs include carboplatin, oxaliplatin, and satraplatin.
