index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.5
title: 4.2.2.5 - Arctic Sea Ice Drift

Ice motion influences the distribution of {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} thickness in the Arctic Basin: locally, through deformation and creation of open water areas; regionally, through {Glossary.*Advection advection} of ice from one area to another; and basin-wide, through export of ice from polar seas to lower latitudes where it melts. The drift and deformation of sea ice is forced primarily by winds and surface currents, but depends also on ice strength, top and bottom surface roughness, and ice concentration. On time scales of days to weeks, winds are responsible for most of the variance in sea ice motion.

Drifting buoys have been used to measure Arctic sea ice motion since 1979. From the record of buoy drift archived by the International Arctic Buoy Programme, {cite.4.'Rampal_et_al_2009 Rampal et al. (2009)} found an increase in average drift speed between 1978 and 2007 of 17 ± 4.5% per decade in winter and 8.5 ± 2.0% per decade in summer. Using daily satellite ice motion fields, which provide a basin-wide picture of the ice drift, {cite.4.'Spreen_et_al_2011 Spreen et al. (2011)} found that, between 1992 and 2008, the spatially averaged winter iFceMdr0if8t speed increased by 10.6 ± 0.9% per decade, but varied regionally between −4 and +16% per decade ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}d). Increases in drift speed are seen over much of the Arctic except in areas with thicker ice ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}b, e.g., north of Greenland and the Canadian Archipelago). The largest increases occurred during the second half of the period (2001–2009), coinciding with the years of rapid ice thinning discussed in {Chapters.4.4_2.4_2_2.4_2_2_4 Section 4.2.2.4}. Both {cite.4.'Rampal_et_al_2009 Rampal et al. (2009)} and {cite.4.'Spreen_et_al_2011 Spreen et al. (2011)} suggest that, since atmospheric reanalyses do not show stronger winds, the positive {Glossary.*Trend trend} in drift speed is probably due to a weaker and thinner ice cover, especially during the period after 2003.

In addition to freezing and melting, sea ice export through Fram Strait is a major component of the Arctic Ocean ice mass balance. Approximately 10% of the area of Arctic Ocean ice is exported annually. Over a 32-year satellite record (1979–2010), the mean annual outflow of ice area through Fram Strait was 699 ± 112 × 103 km2 with a peak during the 1994–1995 winter (updated from , {cite.4.'Kwok_2009}), but with no significant decadal trend. Decadal trends in ice volume export—a more definitive measure of change—is far less certain owing to the lack of an extended record of the thickness of sea ice exported through Fram Strait. Comparison of volume outflow using ICESat thickness estimates ({cite.4.'Spreen_et_al_2009}) with earlier estimates by {cite.4.'Kwok_and_Rothrock_1999 Kwok and Rothrock (1999)} and {cite.4.'Vinje_2001 Vinje (2001)} using thicknesses from moored upward looking sonars shows no discernible change.

Between 2005 and 2008, more than a third of the thicker and older sea ice loss occurred by transport of thick, multi-year ice, typically found west of the Canadian Archipelago, into the southern Beaufort Sea, where it melted in summer ({cite.4.'Kwok_and_Cunningham_2010}). Uncertainties remain in the relative contributions of in-basin melt and export to observed changes in Arctic ice volume loss, and it has also been shown that export of thicker ice through Nares Strait could account for a small fraction of the loss ({cite.4.'Kwok_2005}).
