index: hide
name: Atoms and Subatomic Particles

An  **atom** is the smallest quantity of an element that retains the unique properties of that element. In other words, an atom of hydrogen is a unit of hydrogen—the smallest amount of hydrogen that can exist. As you might guess, atoms are almost unfathomably small. The period at the end of this sentence is millions of atoms wide.

## Atomic Structure and Energy

Atoms are made up of even smaller subatomic particles, three types of which are important: the  **proton**,  **neutron**, and  **electron**. The number of positively-charged protons and non-charged (“neutral”) neutrons, gives mass to the atom, and the number of each in the nucleus of the atom determine the element. The number of negatively-charged electrons that “spin” around the nucleus at close to the speed of light equals the number of protons. An electron has about 1/2000th the mass of a proton or neutron.

{'Figure_2_1_2 Figure 2.1.2} shows two models that can help you imagine the structure of an atom—in this case, helium (He). In the planetary model, helium’s two electrons are shown circling the nucleus in a fixed orbit depicted as a ring. Although this model is helpful in visualizing atomic structure, in reality, electrons do not travel in fixed orbits, but whiz around the nucleus erratically in a so-called electron cloud.


{image:'Figure_2_1_2}
        

An atom’s protons and electrons carry electrical charges. Protons, with their positive charge, are designated p<sup>+</sup>. Electrons, which have a negative charge, are designated e<sup>–</sup>. An atom’s neutrons have no charge: they are electrically neutral. Just as a magnet sticks to a steel refrigerator because their opposite charges attract, the positively charged protons attract the negatively charged electrons. This mutual attraction gives the atom some structural stability. The attraction by the positively charged nucleus helps keep electrons from straying far. The number of protons and electrons within a neutral atom are equal, thus, the atom’s overall charge is balanced.

## Atomic Number and Mass Number

An atom of carbon is unique to carbon, but a proton of carbon is not. One proton is the same as another, whether it is found in an atom of carbon, sodium (Na), or iron (Fe). The same is true for neutrons and electrons. So, what gives an element its distinctive properties—what makes carbon so different from sodium or iron? The answer is the unique quantity of protons each contains. Carbon by definition is an element whose atoms contain six protons. No other element has exactly six protons in its atoms. Moreover,  *all* atoms of carbon, whether found in your liver or in a lump of coal, contain six protons. Thus, the  **atomic number**, which is the number of protons in the nucleus of the atom, identifies the element. Because an atom usually has the same number of electrons as protons, the atomic number identifies the usual number of electrons as well.

In their most common form, many elements also contain the same number of neutrons as protons. The most common form of carbon, for example, has six neutrons as well as six protons, for a total of 12 subatomic particles in its nucleus. An element’s  **mass number** is the sum of the number of protons and neutrons in its nucleus. So the most common form of carbon’s mass number is 12. (Electrons have so little mass that they do not appreciably contribute to the mass of an atom.) Carbon is a relatively light element. Uranium (U), in contrast, has a mass number of 238 and is referred to as a heavy metal. Its atomic number is 92 (it has 92 protons) but it contains 146 neutrons; it has the most mass of all the naturally occurring elements.

The  **periodic table of the elements**, shown in {'Figure_2_1_3 Figure 2.1.3}, is a chart identifying the 92 elements found in nature, as well as several larger, unstable elements discovered experimentally. The elements are arranged in order of their atomic number, with hydrogen and helium at the top of the table, and the more massive elements below. The periodic table is a useful device because for each element, it identifies the chemical symbol, the atomic number, and the mass number, while organizing elements according to their propensity to react with other elements. The number of protons and electrons in an element are equal. The number of protons and neutrons may be equal for some elements, but are not equal for all.


{image:'Figure_2_1_3}
        

## Isotopes

Although each element has a unique number of protons, it can exist as different isotopes. An  **isotope** is one of the different forms of an element, distinguished from one another by different numbers of neutrons. The standard isotope of carbon is <sup>12</sup>C, commonly called carbon twelve. <sup>12</sup>C has six protons and six neutrons, for a mass number of twelve. All of the isotopes of carbon have the same number of protons; therefore,<sup> 13</sup>C has seven neutrons, and <sup>14</sup>C has eight neutrons. The different isotopes of an element can also be indicated with the mass number hyphenated (for example, C-12 instead of <sup>12</sup>C). Hydrogen has three common isotopes, shown in {'Figure_2_1_4 Figure 2.1.4}.


{image:'Figure_2_1_4}
        

An isotope that contains more than the usual number of neutrons is referred to as a heavy isotope. An example is <sup>14</sup>C. Heavy isotopes tend to be unstable, and unstable isotopes are radioactive. A  **radioactive isotope** is an isotope whose nucleus readily decays, giving off subatomic particles and electromagnetic energy. Different radioactive isotopes (also called radioisotopes) differ in their half-life, the time it takes for half of any size sample of an isotope to decay. For example, the half-life of tritium—a radioisotope of hydrogen—is about 12 years, indicating it takes 12 years for half of the tritium nuclei in a sample to decay. Excessive exposure to radioactive isotopes can damage human cells and even cause cancer and birth defects, but when exposure is controlled, some radioactive isotopes can be useful in medicine. For more information, see the Career Connections.
