index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.2.2.1
title: 8.7.2.2.1 - Nitrogen oxides

{Glossary.*Metric Metric} values for NOX usually include the short-lived {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} effect, {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} changes and the CH4-controlled O3 response. NOX also causes RF through nitrate formation, and via CH4 it affects stratospheric H2O and through ozone it influences {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}. In addition, NOx affects CO2 through {Glossary.*Nitrogen_deposition nitrogen deposition} (fertilization effect). Due to high reactivity and the many nonlinear chemical interactions operating on different time scales, as well as heterogeneous emission patterns, calculation of net climate effects of NOX is difficult. The net effect is a balance of large opposing effects with very different temporal behaviours. There is also a large spread in values among the regions due to variations in chemical and physical characteristics of the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}.

As shown in Table 8.A.3 the GTP and {Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP} values are very different. This is due to the fundamentally different nature of these two metrics (see {'Figure_8_28 Figure 8.28}) and the way they capture the temporal behaviour of responses to NOx {Topics.*Emissions emissions}. Time variation of GTP for NOX is complex, which is not directly seen by the somewhat arbitrary choices of time horizon, and the net GTP is a fine balance between the contributing terms. The general pattern for NOX is that the short-lived ozone {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} is always positive, while the CH4-induced ozone forcing and CH4 forcing are always negative (see {Chapters.8.8_5.8_5_1 Section 8.5.1}). Nitrate aerosols from NOx emission are not included in Table 8.A.3. For the GTP, all estimates for NOX from surface sources give a negative net effect. As discussed in {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1.8_7_1_4 Section 8.7.1.4} {cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2010 Collins et al. (2010)} and {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2009 Shindell et al. (2009)} implemented further indirect effects, but these are not included in Table 8.A.3 due to large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}. The metric estimates for NOX reflect the level of knowledge, but they also depend on experimental design, treatment of transport processes, and modelling of background levels. The multi-model study by {cite.8.'Fry_et_al_2012 Fry et al. (2012)} shows the gaseous chemistry response to NOX is relatively robust for European emissions, but that the uncertainty is so large that for some regions of emissions it is not possible to conclude whether NOX causes cooling or warming.
