index: hide
name: Enzyme Structure and Function

A substance that helps speed up a chemical reaction is a  **catalyst**. Catalysts are not used or changed during chemical reactions and, therefore, are reusable. Whereas inorganic molecules may serve as catalysts for a wide range of chemical reactions, proteins called  **enzyme**s serve as catalysts for biochemical reactions inside cells. Enzymes thus play an important role in controlling cellular metabolism.

An enzyme functions by lowering the  **activation energy** of a chemical reaction inside the cell. Activation energy is the energy needed to form or break chemical bonds and convert reactants to products ({'Figure_8_1_Enzymes Figure 8.1.Enzymes}). Enzymes lower the activation energy by binding to the reactant molecules and holding them in such a way as to speed up the reaction.

The chemical reactants to which an enzyme binds are called  **substrate** **s**, and the location within the enzyme where the substrate binds is called the enzyme’s  **active site**. The characteristics of the amino acids near the active site create a very specific chemical environment within the active site that induces suitability to binding, albeit briefly, to a specific substrate (or substrates). Due to this jigsaw puzzle-like match between an enzyme and its substrates,  **enzyme**s are known for their specificity. In fact, as an enzyme binds to its substrate(s), the enzyme structure changes slightly to find the best fit between the transition state (a structural intermediate between the substrate and product) and the active site, just as a rubber glove molds to a hand inserted into it. This active-site modification in the presence of substrate, along with the simultaneous formation of the transition state, is called  **induced fit** ({'Figure_8_1_InducedFit Figure 8.1.InducedFit}). Overall, there is a specifically matched enzyme for each substrate and, thus, for each chemical reaction; however, there is some flexibility as well. Some enzymes have the ability to act on several different structurally related substrates.


{image:'Figure_8_1_Enzymes}
        


{image:'Figure_8_1_InducedFit}
        

Enzymes are subject to influences by local environmental conditions such as pH, substrate concentration, and temperature. Although increasing the environmental temperature generally increases reaction rates, enzyme catalyzed or otherwise, increasing or decreasing the temperature outside of an optimal range can affect chemical bonds within the active site, making them less well suited to bind substrates. High temperatures will eventually cause enzymes, like other biological molecules, to denature, losing their three-dimensional structure and function. Enzymes are also suited to function best within a certain pH range, and, as with temperature, extreme environmental pH values (acidic or basic) can cause enzymes to denature. Active-site amino-acid side chains have their own acidic or basic properties that are optimal for catalysis and, therefore, are sensitive to changes in pH.

Another factor that influences enzyme activity is substrate concentration: Enzyme activity is increased at higher concentrations of substrate until it reaches a saturation point at which the enzyme can bind no additional substrate. Overall, enzymes are optimized to work best under the environmental conditions in which the organisms that produce them live. For example, while microbes that inhabit hot springs have enzymes that work best at high temperatures, human pathogens have enzymes that work best at 37°C. Similarly, while enzymes produced by most organisms work best at a neutral pH, microbes growing in acidic environments make enzymes optimized to low pH conditions, allowing for their growth at those conditions.

Many  **enzyme**s do not work optimally, or even at all, unless bound to other specific nonprotein helper molecules, either temporarily through ionic or hydrogen bonds or permanently through stronger covalent bonds. Binding to these molecules promotes optimal conformation and function for their respective enzymes. Two types of helper molecules are  **cofactor**s and  **coenzyme**s. Cofactors are inorganic ions such as iron (Fe<sup>2+</sup>) and magnesium (Mg<sup>2+</sup>) that help stabilize enzyme conformation and function. One example of an enzyme that requires a metal ion as a cofactor is the enzyme that builds DNA molecules, DNA polymerase, which requires a bound zinc ion (Zn<sup>2+</sup>) to function.

Coenzymes are organic helper molecules that are required for enzyme action. Like enzymes, they are not consumed and, hence, are reusable. The most common sources of coenzymes are dietary vitamins. Some vitamins are precursors to coenzymes and others act directly as coenzymes.

Some cofactors and coenzymes, like  **coenzyme A (CoA)**, often bind to the enzyme’s  **active site**, aiding in the chemistry of the transition of a substrate to a product ({'Figure_8_1_ApoHolo Figure 8.1.ApoHolo}). In such cases, an enzyme lacking a necessary cofactor or coenzyme is called an  **apoenzyme** and is inactive. Conversely, an enzyme with the necessary associated cofactor or coenzyme is called a  **holoenzyme** and is active. NADH and ATP are also both examples of commonly used coenzymes that provide high-energy electrons or  **phosphate group**s, respectively, which bind to enzymes, thereby activating them.


{image:'Figure_8_1_ApoHolo}
        
