index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Metabolism** includes chemical reactions that break down complex molecules ( **catabolism**) and those that build complex molecules ( **anabolism**).
  * Organisms may be classified according to their source of carbon.  **Autotrophs** convert inorganic carbon dioxide into organic carbon;  **heterotrophs** use fixed organic carbon compounds.
  * Organisms may also be classified according to their energy source.  **Phototrophs** obtain their energy from light.  **Chemotrophs** get their energy from chemical compounds.  **Organotrophs** use organic molecules, and  **lithotrophs** use inorganic chemicals.
  * Cellular  **electron carriers** accept high-energy electrons from foods and later serve as electron donors in subsequent  **redox reactions**.  **FAD/FADH2, NAD+/NADH**,  **and NADP+/NADPH** are important electron carriers.
  *  **Adenosine triphosphate (ATP)** serves as the energy currency of the cell, safely storing chemical energy in its two  **high-energy phosphate bonds** for later use to drive processes requiring energy.
  *  **Enzymes** are biological  **catalysts** that increase the rate of chemical reactions inside cells by lowering the activation energy required for the reaction to proceed.
  * In nature,  **exergonic reactions** do not require energy beyond activation energy to proceed, and they release energy. They may proceed without enzymes, but at a slow rate. Conversely,  **endergonic reactions** require energy beyond activation energy to occur. In cells, endergonic reactions are coupled to exergonic reactions, making the combination energetically favorable.
  *  **Substrates** bind to the enzyme’s  **active site**. This process typically alters the structures of both the active site and the substrate, favoring transition-state formation; this is known as  **induced fit**.
  *  **Cofactors** are inorganic ions that stabilize enzyme conformation and function.  **Coenzymes** are organic molecules required for proper enzyme function and are often derived from vitamins. An enzyme lacking a cofactor or coenzyme is an  **apoenzyme;** an enzyme with a bound cofactor or coenzyme is a  **holoenzyme**.
  *  **Competitive inhibitors** regulate enzymes by binding to an enzyme’s active site, preventing substrate binding.  **Noncompetitive (allosteric) inhibitors** bind to  **allosteric sites**, inducing a conformational change in the enzyme that prevents it from functioning.  **Feedback inhibition** occurs when the product of a metabolic pathway noncompetitively binds to an enzyme early on in the pathway, ultimately preventing the synthesis of the product.
