index: hide
name: Energy Carriers: NAD+, NADP+, FAD, and ATP

# Energy Carriers: NAD<sup>+</sup>, NADP<sup>+</sup>, FAD, and ATP

The energy released from the breakdown of the chemical bonds within nutrients can be stored either through the reduction of electron carriers or in the bonds of  **adenosine triphosphate (ATP)**. In living systems, a small class of compounds functions as mobile  **electron carrier** **s**, molecules that bind to and shuttle high-energy electrons between compounds in pathways. The principal electron carriers we will consider originate from the B vitamin group and are derivatives of nucleotides; they are  **nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide**,  **nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate**, and  **flavin adenine dinucleotide**. These compounds can be easily reduced or oxidized. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide ( **NAD+/NADH**) is the most common mobile electron carrier used in catabolism. NAD<sup>+</sup> is the oxidized form of the molecule; NADH is the reduced form of the molecule. Nicotine adenine dinucleotide phosphate ( **NADP+**), the oxidized form of an NAD<sup>+</sup> variant that contains an extra phosphate group, is another important electron carrier; it forms  **NADPH** when reduced. The oxidized form of flavin adenine dinucleotide is  **FAD**, and its reduced form is  **FADH2**. Both NAD<sup>+</sup>/NADH and FAD/FADH<sub>2</sub> are extensively used in energy extraction from sugars during  **catabolism** in  **chemoheterotroph**s, whereas NADP<sup>+</sup>/NADPH plays an important role in anabolic reactions and  **photosynthesis**. Collectively, FADH<sub>2</sub>, NADH, and NADPH are often referred to as having reducing power due to their ability to donate electrons to various chemical reactions.

A living cell must be able to handle the energy released during catabolism in a way that enables the cell to store energy safely and release it for use only as needed. Living cells accomplish this by using the compound  **adenosine triphosphate (ATP)**. ATP is often called the “energy currency” of the cell, and, like currency, this versatile compound can be used to fill any energy need of the cell. At the heart of ATP is a molecule of  **adenosine monophosphate (AMP)**, which is composed of an adenine molecule bonded to a ribose molecule and a single phosphate group. Ribose is a five-carbon sugar found in RNA, and AMP is one of the nucleotides in RNA. The addition of a second phosphate group to this core molecule results in the formation of  **adenosine diphosphate (ADP)**; the addition of a third phosphate group forms ATP ({'Figure_8_1_ATP Figure 8.1.ATP}). Adding a phosphate group to a molecule, a process called  **phosphorylation**, requires energy. Phosphate groups are negatively charged and thus repel one another when they are arranged in series, as they are in ADP and ATP. This repulsion makes the ADP and ATP molecules inherently unstable. Thus, the bonds between phosphate groups (one in ADP and two in ATP) are called  **high-energy phosphate bond** **s**. When these high-energy bonds are broken to release one phosphate (called  **inorganic phosphate [Pi]**) or two connected phosphate groups (called  **pyrophosphate [PPi]**) from ATP through a process called  **dephosphorylation**, energy is released to drive  **endergonic reaction**s ({'Figure_8_1_EndoExo Figure 8.1.EndoExo}).


{image:'Figure_8_1_ATP}
        


{image:'Figure_8_1_EndoExo}
        
