index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.4.1.4.1
title: 9.4.1.4.1 - Global surface temperature

{'Figure_9_8 Figure 9.8} compares the observational record of 20th century changes in global {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} to that simulated by each CMIP5 and EMIC model and the respective multi-model means. The inset on the right of the figure shows the climatological mean temperature for each model, averaged over the 1961–1990 reference period. Although biases in mean temperature are apparent, there is less confidence in observational estimates of climatological temperature than in variations about this mean ({cite.9.'Jones_et_al_1999 Jones et al. (1999)}. For the CMIP5 models, interannual variability in most of the simulations is qualitatively similar to that observed although there are several exceptions. The magnitude of interannual variations in the observations is noticeably larger than the multi-model mean because the averaging of multiple model results acts to filter much of the simulated variability. On the other hand, the episodic volcanic forcing that is applied to most models (see {Chapters.9.9_3.9_3_2.9_3_2_2 Section 9.3.2.2}) is evident in the multi-model agreement with the observed cooling particularly noticeable after the 1991 Pinatubo eruption. The gradual warming evident in the observational record, particularly in the more recent decades, is also evident in the simulations, with the multi-model mean tracking the observed value closely over most of the century, and individual model results departing by less than about 0.5oC. Because the interpretation of differences in model behaviour can be confounded by {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} and forcing, some studies have attempted to identify and remove dominant factors such as El Niño-{Glossary.*Southern_Oscillation Southern Oscillation} ({Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO}) and the impacts of volcanic eruptions (e.g., {cite.9.'Fyfe_et_al_2010}). {'Figure_9_8 Figure 9.8} shows the similar capability for {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs} to simulate the global-scale response to the 20th century {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} (Eby et al. 2013). These

{image:'Figure_9_8}
