index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.3.5.1.1
title: 11.3.5.1.1 - Methane, nitrous oxide and the fluorinated gases

Kyoto GHG abundances projected to year 2100 are given in Annex II (Tables AII.4.1–AII.4.15) as both RCP published values ({cite.11.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011b}) and derived from the RCP {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} emissions pathways. The latter includes current best estimates of atmospheric chemistry and natural sources, with {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} (denoted RCP&). {Topics.*Emissions Emissions} of {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} and {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O}, primarily from the agriculture, forestry and other land use sectors (AFOLU) are uncertain, typically by 25% or more ({cite.11.'Prather_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'NRC_2010}). Following the method of {cite.11.'Prather_et_al_2012 Prather et al. (2012)} a best estimate and uncertainty range for the year 2011 anthropogenic and natural emissions of CH4 and N2O are derived using updated AR5 values (see Chapters {Chapters.2}, {Chapters.5} and {Chapters.6}). The re-scaled RCP& anthropogenic-only emissions of CH4 and N2O are given in Tables AII.2.2 and AII.2.3 and differ from the published {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} by a single scale factor for each species. An uncertainty range for 2011 values (likely, ±1 standard deviation in %, based on Prather et al. 2012) is applied to all subsequent years. Abundances are then integrated using these rescaled RCP& anthropogenic emissions, the best estimate for natural emissions, and a model projecting changes in tropospheric OH (see {cite.11.'Holmes_et_al_2013}; for details). Similar scaling to match current observational constraints (harmonization) was done for the SRES emissions ({cite.11.'Prather_et_al_2001}) and the RCPs ({cite.11.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011b}). However, these earlier harmonizations used older values for lifetimes and natural sources, and did not provide estimates of uncertainty.

Combining CH4 observations, {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} estimates for the present day, the ACCMIP studies, plus estimated limits on changing natural sources, gives a year 2011 total anthropogenic CH4 emission of 354 ± 45 Tg(CH4) yr–1 ({cite.11.'Montzka_et_al_2011}; {cite.11.'Prather_et_al_2012}) (Chapters {Chapters.2}, {Chapters.6} and {Chapters.8}). The RCP total emission lies within 10% of this value, and thus the scaling factor between the RCP& and RCP total emission, is small (Table AII.2.2). {Glossary.*Projection Projection} of the tropospheric OH lifetime of CH4 (AII.5.8) is based on the ACCMIP simulations of the RCPs for 2100 time slice simulations ({cite.11.'Voulgarakis_et_al_2013}), other modelling studies ({cite.11.'Stevenson_et_al_2006}; {cite.11.'John_et_al_2012}) and multi-model sensitivity analyses of key factors ({cite.11.'Holmes_et_al_2013}) that includes uncertainties in emissions from agricultural, {Glossary.*Forest forest} and land use sources, in atmospheric lifetimes, and in chemical feedbacks and loss. Lifetimes, and thus future CH4 abundances, decrease slowly under {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} and RCP4.5, remain almost constant under RCP6.0 and increase slowly under {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}. Future changes in natural sources of CH4 due to land use and climate change are included in a few CMIP5 models and may alter future CH4 abundances ({Chapters.6 Chapter 6}), but there is limited evidence, and thus these changes are not included in the RCP& {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}.

The resulting best estimates of total CH4 anthropogenic emissions and abundances (RCP&) are compared with RCP values in {'Figure_11_21 Figure 11.21}. For RCP2.6, the CH4 abundance is projected to decline continuously over the century by about 30%, whereas in RCP 4.5 and 6.0 it peaks mid-century and then declines to below the year 2011 abundance by the end of the century. Throughout the century, the uncertainty in CH4 abundance for an individual scenario is less than range from RCP2.6 to RCP8.5. For example, by year 2020 the spread in CH4 abundance across the RCPs is already large, 1720 to 1920 ppb, with uncertainty in each scenario estimated at only ±20 ppb. The likely range for RCP& CH4 is 30% wider than that in the RCP CH4 abundances used to force the CMIP5 models ({'Figure_11_21 Figure 11.21}): by year 2100 the likely range of RCP8.5& CH4 abundance extends 520 ppb above the single-valued RCP8.5 CH4 abundance, and RCP2.6& CH4 extends 230 ppb below RCP2.6 CH4.

{image:'Figure_11_21}

Substantial effort has gone into identifying and quantifying individual sources of N2O (see {Chapters.6 Chapter 6}) but less into evaluating its lifetime and chemical feedbacks. Recent multi-model, chemistry–climate studies (CCMVal) project a more vigorous stratospheric overturning by 2100 that is expected to shorten the N2O lifetime ({cite.11.'Oman_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Strahan_et_al_2011}), but no evaluation of the lifetime is reported. Here we combine observations of N2O (pre-industrial, present, and present trends; {Chapters.2 Chapter 2}), with two modern studies of the lifetime ({cite.11.'Hsu_and_Prather_2010}; {cite.11.'Fleming_et_al_2011}), and a Monte Carlo method ({cite.11.'Prather_et_al_2012}) to estimate a year 2011 total anthropogenic emission of 6.7 ± 1.3 TgN(N2O) yr–1 (Table AII.2.3). All RCP N2O (anthropogenic) emissions are reduced by 20% so that year 2011 values are consistent with an observationally constrained budget using a longer lifetime than adopted by the RCPs (Table AII.2.3). The N2O lifetime (Table AII.5.9) is projected to decrease by 2 to 4% by year 2100, due to changing circulation and chemistry in the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} ({cite.11.'Fleming_et_al_2011}) and to the negative chemical {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} on its own lifetime ({cite.11.'Prather_and_Hsu_2010}). In the near term, the spread in N2O across RCP&s is small: 330 to 332 ± 4 ppb in year 2020; 346 to 365 ± 11 ppb in year 2050. By year 2100, the range of best-estimate N2O concentrations across the RCP&s (354–425 ppb) is 20% smaller than that across the RCPs (344– 435 ppb), but the likely range in RCP&s encompasses the RCP range.

Recent measurements show some discrepancies with bottom-up inventories of the industrially produced, synthetic fluorinated (F) gases (AII.2.4 to AII.2.15). European {Glossary.*HFC HFC}-23 emissions are greatly under-reported ({cite.11.'Keller_et_al_2011}) while HFC-125 and 152a are roughly consistent with emissions inventories ({cite.11.'Brunner_et_al_2012}). Globally, HFC365mfc and HFC-245fa emissions are overestimated ({cite.11.'Vollmer_et_al_2011}) while SF6 appears to be under-reported ({cite.11.'Levin_et_al_2010}). For HFC-134a, combining current measurements and lifetimes ({'Table_2_1 Table 2.1}, {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}; WMO, 2010; {cite.11.'Prather_et_al_2012}) gives an estimate of 2010 emissions (~150 Gg yr–1) that is consistent with the RCP range (139 to 153 Gg yr–1). Without clear guidance on how to correct or place uncertainty on the RCP F-gas emissions, the RCP emissions are reported without uncertainty estimates in Annex II Tables AII.2.4 to AII.2.15. For the very long-lived SF6 and perfluorocarbons (CF4, C2F6, C6F10) uncertainty in lifetimes does not significantly affect the projected abundances over the 21st century (AII.4.4 to AII.4.7). Projected HFC abundances depend on the changes in tropospheric OH, which determines their {Glossary.*Atmospheric_lifetime atmospheric lifetime} ({Chapters.8 Chapter 8}). The relative change in hydroxyl radical (OH), as indicated by the projected OH lifetime of CH4 (AII.5.8), is used to project HFCs including uncertainties (likely range) (AII.4.8 to AII.4.15) ({cite.11.'Prather_et_al_2012}).

{Topics.*Scenarios Scenarios} for the ozone-depleting GHG under control of the {Glossary.*Montreal_Protocol Montreal Protocol} (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), HCFCs, halons in AII.4.16) follow scenario A1 of the 2010 WMO {Glossary.*Ozone Ozone} Assessment (WMO, 2010; Table 5-A3). All {Glossary.*CFC CFC} abundances decline throughout the century, but some {Glossary.*HCFC HCFC} abundances increase to 2030 before their phase-out and decline. The summed {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} of all these F-gases is approximately constant (0.35 to 0.39 W m–2) up to year 2040 for all RCPs but declines thereafter. In RCP8.5, the drop in ERF from the Montreal Protocol gases is nearly made up by the growth in HFCs (Tables AII.6.4 to AII.6.6, {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}).
