index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.6.2.1
title: 8.6.2.1 - Regional Forcing Changes During the Industrial Era

The spatial distribution of the {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHG} RF has shifted only slightly over the industrial period; however the RF spatial distributions for NTCFs has shifted with {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, due to the timing of regional development and implementation of pollution standards (Supplementary Material Figures 8.SM.1 and 8.SM.2 show regional trends and emissions maps; {cite.8.'Lamarque_et_al_2013}). {'Figure_8_25 Figure 8.25} shows how the distributions of aerosol and {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} are modelled to have changed up to 1930, 1980 and 2000. Substantial industrial coal-burning in the early part of the 20th century occurred in the northeastern United States and Western Europe, leading to stronger sulphate and {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} forcing near those regions ({'Figure_8_25 Figure 8.25}, left). Between 1950 and 1970, coal burning for power generation increased while coal burning for other purposes was replaced by oil and natural gas and motor vehicle usage grew rapidly in these regions, leading to more sulphate and less BC. Peak aerosol forcing in North America and Europe occurred around 1970–1980 ({'Figure_8_25 Figure 8.25}, second column), while Asian development led to increased biofuel and fossil fuel sources of aerosols and ozone {Glossary.*Precursors precursors} toward the end of the century. During the final decades of the century, desulphurization controls reduced sulphur emissions from North America and Europe, resulting in reduced negative forcing in these regions and positive Arctic aerosol forcing. The SH {Glossary.*Ozone_hole ozone hole} developed during the final three decades, with negative forcing over high latitudes. {Glossary.*Biomass Biomass} burning generated ozone and carbonaceous aerosols in NH high-latitudes early in the century, with increased tropical burning from mid to late century.

{image:'Figure_8_25}

{Glossary.*Aerosol Aerosol} {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} grew rapidly from 1930 to 1980, as did RF due to {Glossary.*Aerosol_radiation_interaction aerosol–radiation interaction}, with a spatial structure reflecting both the influence of aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions that are especially strong over pollution outflow regions and over areas with high surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo}. From 1980 to 2000, aerosol ERF continued to become more negative even as negative RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction grew weaker, with the spatial pattern showing strengthening of aerosol ERF over Asia and weakening of aerosol ERF over North America and Europe.

Soil dust has changed since the pre-industrial due to land disturbance and resulting desertification (a forcing) and to changes in climate (a {Glossary.*Feedback feedback}). {cite.8.'Mahowald_et_al_2010 Mahowald et al. (2010)} showed approximate doubling in dust loading over the 20th century (–0.1 W m–2; consistent with the best estimate in {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_2 Section 7.5.2}; {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4.8_3_4_2 Section 8.3.4.2}), primarily from the Saharan and Middle Eastern Deserts, with largest increase from the 1950s to the 1980s (–0.3 W m–2), followed by a leveling. The increased dustiness reduces model precipitation within the Saharan {Glossary.*Source source} {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, improving agreement with observed precipitation.

Aerosol loading changes during the past century have impacted radiation at the surface ({Chapters.2.2_3.2_3_3 Section 2.3.3}), with peak radiation reductions in North America and Europe in the 1980s, and ongoing reduction in South and East Asia ({cite.8.'Wild_2009}). The {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} and CMIP5 models simulated these trends but underestimated their magnitude, the decadal temperature variations and the {Glossary.*Diurnal_temperature_range diurnal temperature range} over land ({cite.8.'Wild_2009}; see {Chapters.9 Chapter 9}).

Changes in spatial patterns of species and their forcing over the century are difficult to validate due to sparse observations of short-lived species. Some constraint comes from limited historical observations in {Glossary.*Ice_core ice core} records and from shorter trends beginning in late century from satellite and surface-based site measurements. The emissions estimates for historical species are very uncertain, especially for carbonaceous aerosols and dust. Therefore, the confidence in the historical forcing pattern changes is low for RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction and ozone, and very low for ERF, carbonaceous aerosols and dust.
