index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.5.2
title: 8.3.5.2 - Land Cover Changes

{cite.8.'Hurtt_et_al_2006 Hurtt et al. (2006)} estimates that 42 to 68% of the global land surface was impacted by land use activities (crop, pasture, wood harvest) during the 1700–2000 period. Until the mid-20th century most {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} took place over the temperate regions of the NH. Since then, {Glossary.*Reforestation reforestation} is observed in Western Europe, North America and China as a result of land abandonment and {Glossary.*Afforestation afforestation} efforts, while deforestation is concentrated in the tropics. After a rapid increase of the rate of deforestation during the 1980s and 1990s, satellite data indicate a slowdown in the past decade ({cite.8.'FAO_2012}).

Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, {cite.8.'Pongratz_et_al_2008 Pongratz et al. (2008)} and {cite.8.'Kaplan_et_al_2011 Kaplan et al. (2011)} extended existing reconstructions on land use back in time to the past millennium, accounting for the progress of agriculture technique and historical events such as the black death or war invasions. As agriculture was alreadywidespreadoverEuropeandSouthAsiaby1750,theRF,which is defined with respect to this date, is weaker than the radiative flux change from the state of natural vegetation cover (see {'Figure_8_9 Figure 8.9}). {Glossary.*Deforestation Deforestation} in Europe and Asia during the last millennium led to a significant regional negative {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}. {cite.8.'Betts_et_al_2007 Betts et al. (2007)} and {cite.8.'Goosse_et_al_2006 Goosse et al. (2006)} argue that it probably contributed to the ‘{Glossary.*Little_Ice_Age Little Ice Age}’, together with natural solar and volcanic activity components, before the increase in GHG concentration led to temperatures similar to those experienced in the early part of the second millennium. There is still significant {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in the {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} land cover change, and in particular its time evolution ({cite.8.'Gaillard_et_al_2010}).

{image:'Figure_8_9}
