index: hide
name: Carbon Dioxide Transport in the Blood

Carbon dioxide is transported by three major mechanisms. The first mechanism of carbon dioxide transport is by blood plasma, as some carbon dioxide molecules dissolve in the blood. The second mechanism is transport in the form of bicarbonate (HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup>), which also dissolves in plasma. The third mechanism of carbon dioxide transport is similar to the transport of oxygen by erythrocytes ({'Figure_23_5_4 Figure 23.5.4}).


{image:'Figure_23_5_4}
        

## Dissolved Carbon Dioxide

Although carbon dioxide is not considered to be highly soluble in blood, a small fraction—about 7 to 10 percent—of the carbon dioxide that diffuses into the blood from the tissues dissolves in plasma. The dissolved carbon dioxide then travels in the bloodstream and when the blood reaches the pulmonary capillaries, the dissolved carbon dioxide diffuses across the respiratory membrane into the alveoli, where it is then exhaled during pulmonary ventilation.

## Bicarbonate Buffer

A large fraction—about 70 percent—of the carbon dioxide molecules that diffuse into the blood is transported to the lungs as bicarbonate. Most bicarbonate is produced in erythrocytes after carbon dioxide diffuses into the capillaries, and subsequently into red blood cells.  **Carbonic anhydrase (CA)** causes carbon dioxide and water to form carbonic acid (H<sub>2</sub>CO<sub>3</sub>), which dissociates into two ions: bicarbonate (HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup>) and hydrogen (H<sup>+</sup>). The following formula depicts this reaction:

<math display="block" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"> <semantics>  <mrow>   <msub>    <mrow>     <mtext>CO</mtext>    </mrow>    <mtext>2</mtext>   </msub>   <msub>    <mrow>     <mtext> + H</mtext>    </mrow>    <mtext>2</mtext>   </msub>   <msup>    <mrow>     <mtext>O </mtext>    </mrow>    <mrow>     <munder accentunder="true">      <mrow>       <mtext>CA</mtext>      </mrow>      <mo stretchy="false">↔</mo>     </munder>         </mrow>   </msup>   <msub>    <mrow>     <mtext> H</mtext>    </mrow>    <mtext>2</mtext>   </msub>   <msub>    <mrow>     <mtext>CO</mtext>    </mrow>    <mtext>3</mtext>   </msub>   <mo stretchy="false">↔</mo><msup>    <mtext>H</mtext>    <mtext>+</mtext>   </msup>   <msub>    <mrow>     <mtext> + HCO</mtext>    </mrow>    <mrow>     <mn>3</mn><mo>−</mo>    </mrow>   </msub>     </mrow>  <annotation encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaae4qaiaab+eadaWgaaWcbaGaaeOmaaqabaGccaqGGaGaae4kaiaabccacaqGibWaaSbaaSqaaiaabkdaaeqaaOGaae4taiaabccajaaOdaahaaqcbaCabKazbakabaqcba6aa8XbaKazbakabaGaae4qaiaabgeaaiaawgoiaaaakiaabccacaqGibWaaSbaaSqaaiaabkdaaeqaaOGaae4qaiaab+eadaWgaaWcbaGaae4maaqabaGccqGHugYQcaqGibWaaWbaaSqabeaacaqGRaaaaOGaaeiiaiaabUcacaqGGaGaaeisaiaaboeacaqGpbWaaSbaaSqaaiaaiodacqGHsislaeqaaaaa@53ED@</annotation> </semantics></math>

Bicarbonate tends to build up in the erythrocytes, so that there is a greater concentration of bicarbonate in the erythrocytes than in the surrounding blood plasma. As a result, some of the bicarbonate will leave the erythrocytes and move down its concentration gradient into the plasma in exchange for chloride (Cl<sup>–</sup>) ions. This phenomenon is referred to as the  **chloride shift** and occurs because by exchanging one negative ion for another negative ion, neither the electrical charge of the erythrocytes nor that of the blood is altered.

At the pulmonary capillaries, the chemical reaction that produced bicarbonate (shown above) is reversed, and carbon dioxide and water are the products. Much of the bicarbonate in the plasma re-enters the erythrocytes in exchange for chloride ions. Hydrogen ions and bicarbonate ions join to form carbonic acid, which is converted into carbon dioxide and water by carbonic anhydrase. Carbon dioxide diffuses out of the erythrocytes and into the plasma, where it can further diffuse across the respiratory membrane into the alveoli to be exhaled during pulmonary ventilation.

## Carbaminohemoglobin

About 20 percent of carbon dioxide is bound by hemoglobin and is transported to the lungs. Carbon dioxide does not bind to iron as oxygen does; instead, carbon dioxide binds amino acid moieties on the globin portions of hemoglobin to form  **carbaminohemoglobin**, which forms when hemoglobin and carbon dioxide bind. When hemoglobin is not transporting oxygen, it tends to have a bluish-purple tone to it, creating the darker maroon color typical of deoxygenated blood. The following formula depicts this reversible reaction:

<math display="block" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"> <semantics>  <mrow>   <msub>    <mrow>     <mtext>CO</mtext>    </mrow>    <mtext>2</mtext>   </msub>   <mtext> + Hb</mtext><mo stretchy="false">↔</mo><msub>    <mrow>     <mtext>HbCO</mtext>    </mrow>    <mtext>2</mtext>   </msub>     </mrow>  <annotation encoding="MathType-MTEF">MathType@MTEF@5@5@+=feaagyart1ev2aaatCvAUfeBSjuyZL2yd9gzLbvyNv2CaerbuLwBLnhiov2DGi1BTfMBaeXatLxBI9gBaerbd9wDYLwzYbItLDharqqtubsr4rNCHbGeaGqiVu0Je9sqqrpepC0xbbL8F4rqqrFfpeea0xe9Lq=Jc9vqaqpepm0xbba9pwe9Q8fs0=yqaqpepae9pg0FirpepeKkFr0xfr=xfr=xb9adbaqaaeGaciGaaiaabeqaamaabaabaaGcbaGaae4qaiaab+eadaWgaaWcbaGaaeOmaaqabaGccaqGGaGaae4kaiaabccacaqGibGaaeOyaiabgsziRkaabIeacaqGIbGaae4qaiaab+eadaWgaaWcbaGaaeOmaaqabaaaaa@422F@</annotation> </semantics></math>

Similar to the transport of oxygen by heme, the binding and dissociation of carbon dioxide to and from hemoglobin is dependent on the partial pressure of carbon dioxide. Because carbon dioxide is released from the lungs, blood that leaves the lungs and reaches body tissues has a lower partial pressure of carbon dioxide than is found in the tissues. As a result, carbon dioxide leaves the tissues because of its higher partial pressure, enters the blood, and then moves into red blood cells, binding to hemoglobin. In contrast, in the pulmonary capillaries, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide is high compared to within the alveoli. As a result, carbon dioxide dissociates readily from hemoglobin and diffuses across the respiratory membrane into the air.

In addition to the partial pressure of carbon dioxide, the oxygen saturation of hemoglobin and the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood also influence the affinity of hemoglobin for carbon dioxide. The  **Haldane effect** is a phenomenon that arises from the relationship between the partial pressure of oxygen and the affinity of hemoglobin for carbon dioxide. Hemoglobin that is saturated with oxygen does not readily bind carbon dioxide. However, when oxygen is not bound to heme and the partial pressure of oxygen is low, hemoglobin readily binds to carbon dioxide.
