index: hide
name: Viral Virulence

Although viral pathogens are not similar to bacterial pathogens in terms of structure, some of the properties that contribute to their virulence are similar. Viruses use  **adhesins** to facilitate adhesion to host cells, and certain enveloped viruses rely on antigenic variation to avoid the host immune defenses. These virulence factors are discussed in more detail in the following sections.

## Viral Adhesins

One of the first steps in any viral infection is adhesion of the virus to specific receptors on the surface of cells. This process is mediated by adhesins that are part of the  **viral capsid** or  **membrane envelope**. The interaction of  **viral adhesins** with specific cell receptors defines the  **tropism** (preferential targeting) of viruses for specific cells, tissues, and organs in the body. The spike protein  **hemagglutinin** found on  **Influenzavirus** is an example of a viral adhesin; it allows the virus to bind to the  **sialic acid** on the membrane of host respiratory and intestinal cells. Another viral adhesin is the glycoprotein gp20, found on  **HIV**. For HIV to infect cells of the immune system, it must interact with two receptors on the surface of cells. The first interaction involves binding between gp120 and the CD4 cellular marker that is found on some essential immune system cells. However, before viral entry into the cell can occur, a second interaction between gp120 and one of two chemokine receptors (CCR5 and CXCR4) must occur.  lists the adhesins for some common viral pathogens and the specific sites to which these adhesins allow viruses to attach.


****

| Pathogen | Disease | Adhesin | Attachment Site |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Influenzavirus | Influenza | Hemagglutinin | Sialic acid of respiratory and intestinal cells |
| Herpes simplex virus I or II | Oral herpes, genital herpes | Glycoproteins gB, gC, gD | Heparan sulfate on mucosal surfaces of the mouth and genitals |
| Human immunodeficiency virus | HIV/AIDS | Glycoprotein gp120 | CD4 and CCR5 or CXCR4 of immune system cells |
    

## Antigenic Variation in Viruses

Antigenic variation also occurs in certain types of enveloped viruses, including influenza viruses, which exhibit two forms of antigenic variation:  **antigenic drift** and  **antigenic shift** ({'Figure_15_3_Flu Figure 15.3.Flu}). Antigenic drift is the result of point mutations causing slight changes in the spike proteins  **hemagglutinin** (H) and  **neuraminidase** (N). On the other hand, antigenic shift is a major change in spike proteins due to gene reassortment. This reassortment for antigenic shift occurs typically when two different influenza viruses infect the same host.

The rate of antigenic variation in influenza viruses is very high, making it difficult for the immune system to recognize the many different strains of Influenzavirus. Although the body may develop immunity to one strain through natural exposure or vaccination, antigenic variation results in the continual emergence of new strains that the immune system will not recognize. This is the main reason that vaccines against Influenzavirus must be given annually. Each year’s  **influenza vaccine** provides protection against the most prevalent strains for that year, but new or different strains may be more prevalent the following year.


{image:'Figure_15_3_Flu}
        
