index: hide
name: Elbow Joint

The  **elbow joint** is a uniaxial hinge joint formed by the  **humeroulnar joint**, the articulation between the trochlea of the humerus and the trochlear notch of the ulna. Also associated with the elbow are the  **humeroradial joint** and the proximal radioulnar joint. All three of these joints are enclosed within a single articular capsule ({'Figure_9_6_4 Figure 9.6.4}).

The articular capsule of the elbow is thin on its anterior and posterior aspects, but is thickened along its outside margins by strong intrinsic ligaments. These ligaments prevent side-to-side movements and hyperextension. On the medial side is the triangular  **ulnar collateral ligament**. This arises from the medial epicondyle of the humerus and attaches to the medial side of the proximal ulna. The strongest part of this ligament is the anterior portion, which resists hyperextension of the elbow. The ulnar collateral ligament may be injured by frequent, forceful extensions of the forearm, as is seen in baseball pitchers. Reconstructive surgical repair of this ligament is referred to as Tommy John surgery, named for the former major league pitcher who was the first person to have this treatment.

The lateral side of the elbow is supported by the  **radial collateral ligament**. This arises from the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and then blends into the lateral side of the annular ligament. The  **annular ligament** encircles the head of the radius. This ligament supports the head of the radius as it articulates with the radial notch of the ulna at the proximal radioulnar joint. This is a pivot joint that allows for rotation of the radius during supination and pronation of the forearm.


{image:'Figure_9_6_4}
        
