index: hide
name: Organ-Specific Autoimmune Diseases

Some autoimmune diseases are considered organ specific, meaning that the immune system targets specific organs or tissues. Examples of organ-specific autoimmune diseases include celiac disease, Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, type I diabetes mellitus, and Addison disease.

## Celiac Disease

Celiac disease is largely a disease of the small intestine, although other organs may be affected. People in their 30s and 40s, and children are most commonly affected, but  **celiac disease** can begin at any age. It results from a reaction to proteins, commonly called  **gluten**, found mainly in wheat, barley, rye, and some other grains. The disease has several genetic causes (predispositions) and poorly understood environmental influences. On exposure to gluten, the body produces various autoantibodies and an inflammatory response. The inflammatory response in the small intestine leads to a reduction in the depth of the microvilli of the mucosa, which hinders absorption and can lead to weight loss and anemia. The disease is also characterized by diarrhea and abdominal pain, symptoms that are often misdiagnosed as  **irritable bowel syndrome**.

Diagnosis of celiac disease is accomplished from serological tests for the presence of primarily IgA antibodies to components of gluten, the  **transglutinaminase** enzyme, and autoantibodies to  **endomysium**, a connective tissue surrounding muscle fibers. Serological tests are typically followed up with  **endoscopy** and biopsy of the duodenal mucosa. Serological screening surveys have found about 1% of individuals in the United Kingdom are positive even though they do not all display symptoms. This early recognition allows for more careful monitoring and prevention of severe disease.

Celiac disease is treated with complete removal of gluten-containing foods from the diet, which results in improved symptoms and reduced risk of complications. Other theoretical approaches include breeding grains that do not contain the immunologically reactive components or developing dietary supplements that contain enzymes that break down the protein components that cause the immune response.

## Disorders of the Thyroid

 **Graves disease** is the most common cause of  **hyperthyroidism** in the United States. Symptoms of Graves disease result from the production of  **thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulin (TSI)** also called  **TSH-receptor antibody**. TSI targets and binds to the receptor for  **thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)**, which is naturally produced by the  **pituitary gland**. TSI may cause conflicting symptoms because it may stimulate the thyroid to make too much thyroid hormone or block  **thyroid** hormone production entirely, making diagnosis more difficult. Signs and symptoms of Graves disease include heat intolerance, rapid and irregular heartbeat, weight loss,  **goiter** (a swollen thyroid gland, protruding under the skin of the throat [{'Figure_19_2_auto Figure 19.2.auto}]) and  **exophthalmia** (bulging eyes) often referred to as Graves  **ophthalmopathy** ({'Figure_19_2_exophth Figure 19.2.exophth}).

The most common cause of  **hypothyroidism** in the United States is  **Hashimoto thyroiditis**, also called  **chronic lymphocytic thyroiditis**. Patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis often develop a spectrum of different diseases because they are more likely to develop additional autoimmune diseases such as Addison disease (discussed later in this section), type 1 diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis, and celiac disease. Hashimoto thyroiditis is a T<sub>H</sub>1 cell-mediated disease that occurs when the thyroid gland is attacked by cytotoxic lymphocytes, macrophages, and autoantibodies. This autoimmune response leads to numerous symptoms that include goiter ({'Figure_19_2_auto Figure 19.2.auto}), cold intolerance, muscle weakness, painful and stiff joints, depression, and memory loss.


{image:'Figure_19_2_auto}
        


{image:'Figure_19_2_exophth}
        

## Type 1 Diabetes

Juvenile  **diabetes**, or  **type 1 diabetes mellitus**, is usually diagnosed in children and young adults. It is a T-cell-dependent autoimmune disease characterized by the selective destruction of the β cells of the islets of Langerhans in the  **pancreas** by CD4 T<sub>H</sub>1-mediated CD8 T cells, anti-β-cell antibodies, and macrophage activity. There is also evidence that viral infections can have either a potentiating or inhibitory role in the development of type 1 diabetes (T1D) mellitus. The destruction of the β cells causes a lack of  **insulin** production by the pancreas. In T1D, β-cell destruction may take place over several years, but symptoms of  **hyperglycemia**, extreme increase in thirst and urination, weight loss, and extreme fatigue usually have a sudden onset, and diagnosis usually does not occur until most β cells have already been destroyed.

## Autoimmune Addison Disease

Destruction of the  **adrenal glands** (the glands lying above the kidneys that produce glucocorticoids, mineralocorticoids, and sex steroids) is the cause of  **Addison disease**, also called  **primary adrenal insufficiency (PAI)**. Today, up to 80% of Addison disease cases are diagnosed as autoimmune Addison disease (AAD), which is caused by an autoimmune response to adrenal tissues disrupting adrenal function. Disruption of adrenal function causes impaired metabolic processes that require normal steroid hormone levels, causing signs and symptoms throughout the body. There is evidence that both humoral and CD4 T<sub>H</sub>1-driven CD8 T-cell–mediated immune mechanisms are directed at the adrenal cortex in AAD. There is also evidence that the autoimmune response is associated with autoimmune destruction of other endocrine glands as well, such as the  **pancreas** and  **thyroid**, conditions collectively referred to as  **autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS)**. In up to 80% of patients with AAD, antibodies are produced to three enzymes involved in steroid synthesis: 21-hydroxylase (21-OH), 17α-hydroxylase, and cholesterol side-chain–cleaving enzyme. The most common autoantibody found in AAD is to 21-OH, and antibodies to any of the key enzymes for steroid production are diagnostic for AAD. The adrenal cortex cells are targeted, destroyed, and replaced with fibrous tissue by immune-mediated inflammation. In some patients, at least 90% of the adrenal cortex is destroyed before symptoms become diagnostic.

Symptoms of AAD include weakness, nausea, decreased appetite, weight loss,  **hyperpigmentation** ({'Figure_19_2_hyperpig Figure 19.2.hyperpig}),  **hyperkalemia** (elevated blood potassium levels),  **hyponatremia** (decreased blood sodium levels),  **hypoglycemia** (decreased levels of blood sugar),  **hypotension** (decreased blood pressure),  **anemia**,  **lymphocytosis** (decreased levels of white blood cells), and fatigue. Under extreme stress, such as surgery, accidental trauma, or infection, patients with AAD may experience an adrenal crisis that causes the patient to vomit, experience abdominal pain, back or leg cramps, and even severe hypotension leading to shock.


{image:'Figure_19_2_hyperpig}
        
