index: hide
name: Plasma Protein Mediators

Many nonspecific innate immune factors are found in  **plasma**, the fluid portion of blood. Plasma contains electrolytes, sugars, lipids, and proteins, each of which helps to maintain homeostasis (i.e., stable internal body functioning), and contains the proteins involved in the clotting of blood. Additional proteins found in blood plasma, such as acute-phase proteins, complement proteins, and cytokines, are involved in the nonspecific innate immune response.

## Acute-Phase Proteins

The  **acute-phase proteins** are another class of antimicrobial mediators. Acute-phase proteins are primarily produced in the liver and secreted into the blood in response to inflammatory molecules from the immune system. Examples of acute-phase proteins include  **C-reactive protein**,  **serum amyloid A**,  **ferritin**,  **transferrin**,  **fibrinogen**, and  **mannose-binding lectin**. Each of these proteins has a different chemical structure and inhibits or destroys microbes in some way ().


| Some Acute-Phase Proteins and Their Functions |
|:-:|
| C-reactive protein | Coats bacteria (opsonization), preparing them for ingestion by phagocytes |
| Serum amyloid A |
| Ferritin | Bind and sequester iron, thereby inhibiting the growth of pathogens |
| Transferrin |
| Fibrinogen | Involved in formation of blood clots that trap bacterial pathogens |
| Mannose-binding lectin | Activates complement cascade |
    

## The Complement System

The  **complement system** is a group of plasma protein mediators that can act as an innate nonspecific defense while also serving to connect innate and adaptive immunity (discussed in the next chapter). The complement system is composed of more than 30 proteins (including C1 through C9) that normally circulate as precursor proteins in blood. These precursor proteins become activated when stimulated or triggered by a variety of factors, including the presence of microorganisms. Complement proteins are considered part of innate nonspecific immunity because they are always present in the blood and tissue fluids, allowing them to be activated quickly. Also, when activated through the alternative pathway (described later in this section), complement proteins target pathogens in a nonspecific manner.

The process by which circulating complement precursors become functional is called  **complement activation**. This process is a cascade that can be triggered by one of three different mechanisms, known as the alternative, classical, and lectin pathways.

The  **alternative pathway** is initiated by the spontaneous activation of the complement protein C3. The hydrolysis of C3 produces two products, C3a and C3b. When no invader microbes are present, C3b is very quickly degraded in a hydrolysis reaction using the water in the blood. However, if invading microbes are present, C3b attaches to the surface of these microbes. Once attached, C3b will recruit other complement proteins in a cascade ({'Figure_17_3_ClassAltPa Figure 17.3.ClassAltPa}).

The  **classical pathway** provides a more efficient mechanism of activating the complement cascade, but it depends upon the production of antibodies by the specific adaptive immune defenses. To initiate the classical pathway, a specific antibody must first bind to the pathogen to form an antibody-antigen complex. This activates the first protein in the complement cascade, the C1 complex. The C1 complex is a multipart protein complex, and each component participates in the full activation of the overall complex. Following recruitment and activation of the C1 complex, the remaining classical pathway complement proteins are recruited and activated in a cascading sequence ({'Figure_17_3_ClassAltPa Figure 17.3.ClassAltPa}).

The  **lectin activation pathway** is similar to the classical pathway, but it is triggered by the binding of mannose-binding lectin, an acute-phase protein, to carbohydrates on the microbial surface. Like other acute-phase proteins, lectins are produced by liver cells and are commonly upregulated in response to inflammatory signals received by the body during an infection ({'Figure_17_3_ClassAltPa Figure 17.3.ClassAltPa}).


{image:'Figure_17_3_ClassAltPa}
        

Although each complement activation pathway is initiated in a different way, they all provide the same protective outcomes: opsonization, inflammation,  **chemotaxis**, and cytolysis. The term  **opsonization** refers to the coating of a pathogen by a chemical substance (called an  **opsonin**) that allows phagocytic cells to recognize, engulf, and destroy it more easily. Opsonins from the complement cascade include C1q, C3b, and C4b. Additional important opsonins include mannose-binding proteins and antibodies. The complement fragments C3a and C5a are well-characterized anaphylatoxins with potent proinflammatory functions. Anaphylatoxins activate mast cells, causing degranulation and the release of inflammatory chemical signals, including mediators that cause vasodilation and increased vascular permeability. C5a is also one of the most potent chemoattractants for neutrophils and other white blood cells, cellular defenses that will be discussed in the next section.

The complement proteins C6, C7, C8, and C9 assemble into a  **membrane attack complex (MAC)**, which allows C9 to polymerize into pores in the membranes of gram-negative bacteria. These pores allow water, ions, and other molecules to move freely in and out of the targeted cells, eventually leading to cell lysis and death of the pathogen ({'Figure_17_3_ClassAltPa Figure 17.3.ClassAltPa}). However, the MAC is only effective against gram-negative bacteria; it cannot penetrate the thick layer of peptidoglycan associated with cell walls of gram-positive bacteria. Since the MAC does not pose a lethal threat to gram-positive bacterial pathogens, complement-mediated opsonization is more important for their clearance.

## Cytokines

 **Cytokines** are soluble proteins that act as communication signals between cells. In a nonspecific innate immune response, various  **cytokines** may be released to stimulate production of chemical mediators or other cell functions, such as cell proliferation, cell differentiation, inhibition of cell division, apoptosis, and chemotaxis.

When a cytokine binds to its target receptor, the effect can vary widely depending on the type of cytokine and the type of cell or receptor to which it has bound. The function of a particular cytokine can be described as autocrine, paracrine, or endocrine ({'Figure_17_1_Cytokine Figure 17.1.Cytokine}). In  **autocrine function**, the same cell that releases the cytokine is the recipient of the signal; in other words, autocrine function is a form of self-stimulation by a cell. In contrast,  **paracrine function** involves the release of cytokines from one cell to other nearby cells, stimulating some response from the recipient cells. Last,  **endocrine function** occurs when cells release cytokines into the bloodstream to be carried to target cells much farther away.


{image:'Figure_17_1_Cytokine}
        

Three important classes of cytokines are the interleukins, chemokines, and interferons. The  **interleukins** were originally thought to be produced only by leukocytes (white blood cells) and to only stimulate leukocytes, thus the reasons for their name. Although interleukins are involved in modulating almost every function of the immune system, their role in the body is not restricted to immunity. Interleukins are also produced by and stimulate a variety of cells unrelated to immune defenses.

The  **chemokines** are chemotactic factors that recruit leukocytes to sites of infection, tissue damage, and inflammation. In contrast to more general chemotactic factors, like complement factor C5a, chemokines are very specific in the subsets of leukocytes they recruit.

Interferons are a diverse group of immune signaling molecules and are especially important in our defense against viruses. Type I  **interferons** (interferon-α and interferon-β) are produced and released by cells infected with virus. These interferons stimulate nearby cells to stop production of mRNA, destroy RNA already produced, and reduce protein synthesis. These cellular changes inhibit viral replication and production of mature virus, slowing the spread of the virus. Type I interferons also stimulate various immune cells involved in viral clearance to more aggressively attack virus-infected cells. Type II interferon (interferon-γ) is an important activator of immune cells ({'Figure_17_3_Interferon Figure 17.3.Interferon}).


{image:'Figure_17_3_Interferon}
        
