index: hide
name: The Teeth

The teeth, or  **dentes** (singular = dens), are organs similar to bones that you use to tear, grind, and otherwise mechanically break down food.

## Types of Teeth

During the course of your lifetime, you have two sets of teeth (one set of teeth is a  **dentition**). Your 20  **deciduous teeth**, or baby teeth, first begin to appear at about 6 months of age. Between approximately age 6 and 12, these teeth are replaced by 32  **permanent teeth**. Moving from the center of the mouth toward the side, these are as follows ({'Figure_24_3_4 Figure 24.3.4}):

  * The eight  **incisors**, four top and four bottom, are the sharp front teeth you use for biting into food.
  * The four  **cuspids** (or canines) flank the incisors and have a pointed edge (cusp) to tear up food. These fang-like teeth are superb for piercing tough or fleshy foods.
  * Posterior to the cuspids are the eight  **premolars** (or bicuspids), which have an overall flatter shape with two rounded cusps useful for mashing foods.
  * The most posterior and largest are the 12  **molars**, which have several pointed cusps used to crush food so it is ready for swallowing. The third members of each set of three molars, top and bottom, are commonly referred to as the wisdom teeth, because their eruption is commonly delayed until early adulthood. It is not uncommon for wisdom teeth to fail to erupt; that is, they remain impacted. In these cases, the teeth are typically removed by orthodontic surgery.


{image:'Figure_24_3_4}
        

## Anatomy of a Tooth

The teeth are secured in the alveolar processes (sockets) of the maxilla and the mandible.  **Gingivae** (commonly called the gums) are soft tissues that line the alveolar processes and surround the necks of the teeth. Teeth are also held in their sockets by a connective tissue called the periodontal ligament.

The two main parts of a tooth are the  **crown**, which is the portion projecting above the gum line, and the  **root**, which is embedded within the maxilla and mandible. Both parts contain an inner  **pulp cavity**, containing loose connective tissue through which run nerves and blood vessels. The region of the pulp cavity that runs through the root of the tooth is called the root canal. Surrounding the pulp cavity is  **dentin**, a bone-like tissue. In the root of each tooth, the dentin is covered by an even harder bone-like layer called  **cementum**. In the crown of each tooth, the dentin is covered by an outer layer of  **enamel**, the hardest substance in the body ({'Figure_24_3_5 Figure 24.3.5}).

Although enamel protects the underlying dentin and pulp cavity, it is still nonetheless susceptible to mechanical and chemical erosion, or what is known as tooth decay. The most common form, dental caries (cavities) develops when colonies of bacteria feeding on sugars in the mouth release acids that cause soft tissue inflammation and degradation of the calcium crystals of the enamel. The digestive functions of the mouth are summarized in .


{image:'Figure_24_3_5}
        


****

| Structure | Action | Outcome |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Lips and cheeks | Confine food between teeth | Food is chewed evenly during mastication |
| Salivary glands | Secrete saliva |  Moisten and lubricate the lining of the mouth and pharynx Moisten, soften, and dissolve food Clean the mouth and teeth Salivary amylase breaks down starch  |
| Tongue’s extrinsic muscles | Move tongue sideways, and in and out |  Manipulate food for chewing Shape food into a bolus Manipulate food for swallowing  |
| Tongue’s intrinsic muscles | Change tongue shape | Manipulate food for swallowing |
| Taste buds | Sense food in mouth and sense taste | Nerve impulses from taste buds are conducted to salivary nuclei in the brain stem and then to salivary glands, stimulating saliva secretion |
| Lingual glands | Secrete lingual lipase  |  Activated in the stomach Break down triglycerides into fatty acids and diglycerides |
| Teeth | Shred and crush food | Break down solid food into smaller particles for deglutition |
    
