index: hide
public: ar5-Box-4.1
name: Box 4.1
title: Box 4.1 - Interactions of Snow within the Cryosphere

Snow is just one component of the {Glossary.*Cryosphere cryosphere}, but snow also sustains ice sheets and glaciers, and has strong interactions with all the other cryospheric components, except sub-sea {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost}. For example, snow can affect the rate of sea-ice production, and can alter {Glossary.*Frozen_ground frozen ground} through its insulating effect. Snowfall and the persistence of snow cover are strongly dependent on atmospheric temperature and precipitation, and are thus likely to change in complex ways in a changing climate (e.g, {cite.4.'Brown_and_Mote_2009}).

For the Earth’s climate in general, and more specifically, the cryospheric components on which snow falls, the two most important physical properties of snow are its high {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} (reflectivity of {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation}) and its low thermal conductivity, which results because its high air content makes it an excellent thermal insulator. Both factors substantially alter the flux of energy between the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} and the material beneath the snow cover. Snow also has a major impact on the total {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} of the Earth’s surface because large regions in the NH are seasonally covered by snow (e.g., {cite.4.'Barry_and_Gran_2011}). When seasonal snow melts it is also an important fresh water resource.

The high albedo of snow has a strong impact on the radiative energy balance of all surfaces on which it lies, most of which (including glaciers and {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}) are much less reflective. For example, the albedo of bare {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} or sea ice is typically only 20 to 30%, and hence 70 to 80% of solar radiation is absorbed at the surface. For ice at the melting point, this energy melts the ice. With a fresh snow cover over ice, the albedo changes to 80% or even higher and melting is greatly reduced (e.g., {cite.4.'Oerlemans_2001}). The effect is similar for other land surfaces—bare soil, frozen ground, low-lying vegetation—but here the thermal properties of the snow cover also play an important role by insulating the ground from changes in ambient air temperature.

While an insulating snow cover can reduce the growth of sea ice, a heavy snow load, particularly in the Antarctic, often depresses the sea ice surface below {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} and this leads to faster transformation of snow to ice (see {FAQ_4_1 FAQ 4.1}). Even without flooding, the basal snow layer on Antarctic sea ice tends to be moist and saline because brine is wicked up through the snow cover. In regions of heavily ridged and deformed sea ice, snow redistributed by wind smoothes the ice surface, reducing the drag of the air on the ice and thus slowing ice drift and reducing heat exchange ({cite.4.'Massom_et_al_2001}) .

For frozen ground, the insulation characteristics of snow cover are particularly important. If the air above is colder than the material on which it lies, the presence of snow will reduce heat transfer upwards, especially for fresh snow with a low density. This could, for example, reduce the seasonal freezing of soil, slow down the freezing of the {Glossary.*Active_layer active layer} (seasonally thawed layer) or protect permafrost from cooling. Alternatively, if the air is warmer than the material beneath the snow, heat transfer downwards from the air is reduced and the presence of snow cover can increase the thickness of seasonal soil freeze and protect permafrost from warming. Which process applies depends on the timing of the snowfall, its thickness, and its duration (e.g., {cite.4.'Zhang_2005}; {cite.4.'Smith_et_al_2012}).

For the preceding reasons, the timing of snowfall and the persistence of snow cover are of major importance. Whereas snow falling on glaciers and ice sheets in summer has a strongly positive (sustaining) effect on the mass budget, early snow cover can reduce radiative and conductive cooling and freezing of the active layer. During winter, snowfall is the most important {Glossary.*Source source} of nourishment for most glaciers, but radiative cooling of frozen ground is strongly reduced by thick snow cover ({cite.4.'Zhang_2005}).
