index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.5.3
title: 8.3.5.3 - Surface Albedo and Radiative Forcing

Surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} is the ratio between reflected and incident solar flux at the surface. It varies with the surface cover. Most forests are darker (i.e., lower albedo) than grasses and croplands, which are darker than barren land and desert. As a consequence, deforestation tends to increase the Earth albedo (negative RF) while cultivation of some bright surfaces may have the opposite effect. {Glossary.*Deforestation Deforestation} also leads to a large increase in surface albedo in case of snow cover as low vegetation accumulates continuous snow cover more readily in early winter allowing it to persist longer in spring. This causes average winter albedo in deforested areas to be generally much higher than that of a tree-covered landscape ({cite.8.'Bernier_et_al_2011}).

The pre-industrial impact of the Earth albedo increase due to {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change}, including the reduced snow masking by tall vegetation, is estimated to be on the order of –0.05 W m–2 ({cite.8.'Pongratz_et_al_2009}). Since then, the increase in world population and agriculture development led to additional {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}. Based on {Glossary.*Reconstruction_of_climate_variable reconstruction} of land use since the beginning of the Industrial Era, {cite.8.'Betts_et_al_2007 Betts et al. (2007)} and {cite.8.'Pongratz_et_al_2009 Pongratz et al. (2009)} computed spatially and temporally distributed estimates of the land use RF. They estimate that the shortwave flux change induced by the albedo variation, from fully natural vegetation state to 1992, is on the order of –0.2 W m–2 (range –0.24 to –0.21W m–2). The RF, defined with respect to 1750, is in the range –0.17 to –0.18 W m–2. A slightly stronger value (–0.22 W m–2) was found by {cite.8.'Davin_et_al_2007 Davin et al. (2007)} for the period 1860–1992.

In recent years, the availability of global scale MODIS data ({cite.8.'Schaaf_et_al_2002}) has improved surface albedo estimates ({cite.8.'Rechid_et_al_2009}). These data have been used by Myhre et al (2005a) and {cite.8.'Kvalevag_et_al_2010 Kvalevag et al. (2010)}. They argue that the observed albedo difference between natural vegetation and croplands is less than usually assumed in climate simulations, so that the RF due to land use change is weaker than in estimates that do not use the satellite data. On the other hand, {cite.8.'Nair_et_al_2007 Nair et al. (2007)} show observational evidence of an underestimate of the surface albedo change in land use analysis in southwest Australia. Overall, there is still a significant range of RF estimates for the albedo component of land use forcing. This is mostly due to the range of albedo change as a result of land use change, as shown in an inter-comparison of seven {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}–land models (de Noblet-Ducoudre et al., 2012).

Deforestation has a direct impact on the atmospheric {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} concentration and therefore contributes to the {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHG} RF as quantified in {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_2 Section 8.3.2}. Conversely, {Glossary.*Afforestation afforestation} is a climate {Glossary.*Mitigation mitigation} strategy to limit the CO2 concentration increase. Several authors have compared the radiative impact of deforestation/afforestation that results from the albedo change with the {Glossary.*Greenhouse_effect greenhouse effect} of CO2 released/ sequestered. {cite.8.'Pongratz_et_al_2010 Pongratz et al. (2010)} shows that the historic land use change has had a warming impact (i.e., greenhouse effect dominates) at the global scale and over most regions with the exception of Europe and India. {cite.8.'Bala_et_al_2007 Bala et al. (2007)} results show latitudinal contrast where the greenhouse effect dominates for low-latitude deforestation while the combined effect of albedo and {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration} impact does at high latitude. These results are also supported by {cite.8.'Bathiany_et_al_2010 Bathiany et al. (2010)}. Similarly, {cite.8.'Lohila_et_al_2010 Lohila et al. (2010)} shows that the afforestation of boreal peatlands results in a balanced RF between the albedo and greenhouse effect. Overall, because of the opposite impacts, the potential of afforestation to mitigate climate change is limited ({cite.8.'Arora_and_Montenegro_2011}) while it may have undesired impacts on the atmospheric circulation, shifting precipitation patterns ({cite.8.'Swann_et_al_2012}).
