index: hide
name: Supercritical Fluids

If we place a sample of water in a sealed container at 25 °C, remove the air, and let the vaporization-condensation equilibrium establish itself, we are left with a mixture of liquid water and water vapor at a pressure of 0.03 atm. A distinct boundary between the more dense liquid and the less dense gas is clearly observed. As we increase the temperature, the pressure of the water vapor increases, as described by the liquid-gas curve in the phase diagram for water ({'Figure_10_4_H2OPhasDi2 Figure 10.4.H2OPhasDi2}), and a two-phase equilibrium of liquid and gaseous phases remains. At a temperature of 374 °C, the vapor pressure has risen to 218 atm, and any further increase in temperature results in the disappearance of the boundary between liquid and vapor phases. All of the water in the container is now present in a single phase whose physical properties are intermediate between those of the gaseous and liquid states. This phase of matter is called a  **supercritical fluid**, and the temperature and pressure above which this phase exists is the  **critical point** ({'Figure_10_4_CritFluid Figure 10.4.CritFluid}). Above its critical temperature, a gas cannot be liquefied no matter how much pressure is applied. The pressure required to liquefy a gas at its critical temperature is called the critical pressure. The critical temperatures and critical pressures of some common substances are given in .


| Substance | Critical Temperature (K) | Critical Pressure (atm) |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| hydrogen | 33.2 | 12.8 |
| nitrogen | 126.0 | 33.5 |
| oxygen | 154.3 | 49.7 |
| carbon dioxide | 304.2 | 73.0 |
| ammonia | 405.5 | 111.5 |
| sulfur dioxide | 430.3 | 77.7 |
| water | 647.1 | 217.7 |
    


{image:'Figure_10_4_CritFluid}
        

Like a gas, a supercritical fluid will expand and fill a container, but its density is much greater than typical gas densities, typically being close to those for liquids. Similar to liquids, these fluids are capable of dissolving nonvolatile solutes. They exhibit essentially no surface tension and very low viscosities, however, so they can more effectively penetrate very small openings in a solid mixture and remove soluble components. These properties make supercritical fluids extremely useful solvents for a wide range of applications. For example, supercritical carbon dioxide has become a very popular solvent in the food industry, being used to decaffeinate coffee, remove fats from potato chips, and extract flavor and fragrance compounds from citrus oils. It is nontoxic, relatively inexpensive, and not considered to be a pollutant. After use, the CO<sub>2</sub> can be easily recovered by reducing the pressure and collecting the resulting gas.
