index: hide
name: Foundations of Genetics

Despite the discovery of DNA in the late 1800s, scientists did not make the association with heredity for many more decades. To make this connection, scientists, including a number of microbiologists, performed many experiments on plants, animals, and bacteria.

## Mendel’s Pea Plants

While Miescher was isolating and discovering DNA in the 1860s, Austrian monk and botanist Johann Gregor  **Mendel** (1822–1884) was experimenting with garden peas, demonstrating and documenting basic patterns of inheritance, now known as Mendel’s laws.

In 1856, Mendel began his decade-long research into inheritance patterns. He used the diploid garden pea,  *Pisum sativum*, as his primary model system because it naturally self-fertilizes and is highly inbred, producing “true-breeding” pea plant lines—plants that always produce offspring that look like the parent. By experimenting with true-breeding pea plants, Mendel avoided the appearance of unexpected traits in offspring that might occur if he used plants that were not true-breeding. Mendel performed hybridizations, which involve mating two true-breeding individuals (P generation) that have different traits, and examined the characteristics of their offspring (first filial generation, F<sub>1</sub>) as well as the offspring of self-fertilization of the F<sub>1</sub> generation (second filial generation, F<sub>2</sub>) ({'Figure_10_1_Mendel Figure 10.1.Mendel}).


{image:'Figure_10_1_Mendel}
        

In 1865, Mendel presented the results of his experiments with nearly 30,000 pea plants to the local natural history society. He demonstrated that traits are transmitted faithfully from parents to offspring independently of other traits. In 1866, he published his work, “Experiments in Plant Hybridization,” in the  *Proceedings of the Natural History Society of Brünn*. Mendel’s work went virtually unnoticed by the scientific community, which believed, incorrectly, in the theory of blending of traits in continuous variation.

He was not recognized for his extraordinary scientific contributions during his lifetime. In fact, it was not until 1900 that his work was rediscovered, reproduced, and revitalized by scientists on the brink of discovering the chromosomal basis of heredity.

## The Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance

Mendel carried out his experiments long before  **chromosomes** were visualized under a microscope. However, with the improvement of microscopic techniques during the late 1800s, cell biologists could stain and visualize subcellular structures with dyes and observe their actions during  **meiosis**. They were able to observe chromosomes replicating, condensing from an amorphous nuclear mass into distinct X-shaped bodies and migrating to separate cellular poles. The speculation that chromosomes might be the key to understanding heredity led several scientists to examine Mendel’s publications and re-evaluate his model in terms of the behavior of chromosomes during  **mitosis** and meiosis.

In 1902, Theodor  **Boveri** (1862–1915) observed that in sea urchins, nuclear components (chromosomes) determined proper embryonic development. That same year, Walter  **Sutton** (1877–1916) observed the separation of chromosomes into daughter cells during meiosis. Together, these observations led to the development of the  **Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance**, which identified chromosomes as the genetic material responsible for Mendelian inheritance.

Despite compelling correlations between the behavior of chromosomes during meiosis and Mendel’s observations, the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance was proposed long before there was any direct evidence that traits were carried on chromosomes. Thomas Hunt  **Morgan** (1866–1945) and his colleagues spent several years carrying out crosses with the fruit fly,  *Drosophila melanogaster*. They performed meticulous microscopic observations of fly chromosomes and correlated these observations with resulting fly characteristics. Their work provided the first experimental evidence to support the Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance in the early 1900s. In 1915, Morgan and his “Fly Room” colleagues published  *The Mechanism of Mendelian Heredity,* which identified chromosomes as the cellular structures responsible for heredity. For his many significant contributions to genetics, Morgan received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1933.

In the late 1920s, Barbara  **McClintock** (1902–1992) developed chromosomal staining techniques to visualize and differentiate between the different chromosomes of maize (corn). In the 1940s and 1950s, she identified a breakage event on chromosome 9, which she named the dissociation locus ( *Ds*).  *Ds* could change position within the chromosome. She also identified an activator locus ( *Ac*).  *Ds* chromosome breakage could be activated by an  *Ac* element (transposase enzyme). At first, McClintock’s finding of these  **jumping genes**, which we now call  **transposons**, was not accepted by the scientific community. It wasn’t until the 1960s and later that transposons were discovered in bacteriophages, bacteria, and  *Drosophila*. Today, we know that transposons are mobile segments of DNA that can move within the genome of an organism. They can regulate gene expression, protein expression, and virulence (ability to cause disease).

## Microbes and Viruses in Genetic Research

Microbiologists have also played a crucial part in our understanding of genetics. Experimental organisms such as  **Mendel**’s garden peas, Morgan’s fruit flies, and  **McClintock**’s corn had already been used successfully to pave the way for an understanding of genetics. However, microbes and viruses were (and still are) excellent model systems for the study of  **genetics** because, unlike peas, fruit flies, and corn, they are propagated more easily in the laboratory, growing to high population densities in a small amount of space and in a short time. In addition, because of their structural simplicity, microbes and viruses are more readily manipulated genetically.

Fortunately, despite significant differences in size, structure, reproduction strategies, and other biological characteristics, there is biochemical unity among all organisms; they have in common the same underlying molecules responsible for  **heredity** and the use of genetic material to give cells their varying characteristics. In the words of French scientist Jacques  **Monod**, “What is true for  *E. coli* is also true for the elephant,” meaning that the biochemistry of life has been maintained throughout evolution and is shared in all forms of life, from simple unicellular organisms to large, complex organisms. This biochemical continuity makes microbes excellent models to use for genetic studies.

In a clever set of experiments in the 1930s and 1940s, German scientist Joachim  **Hämmerling** (1901–1980), using the single-celled alga  **Acetabularia** as a microbial model, established that the genetic information in a eukaryotic cell is housed within the  **nucleus**.  *Acetabularia* spp. are unusually large algal cells that grow asymmetrically, forming a “foot” containing the nucleus, which is used for substrate attachment; a stalk; and an umbrella-like cap—structures that can all be easily seen with the naked eye. In an early set of experiments, Hämmerling removed either the cap or the foot of the cells and observed whether new caps or feet were regenerated ({'Figure_10_1_footandcap Figure 10.1.footandcap}). He found that when the foot of these cells was removed, new feet did not grow; however, when caps were removed from the cells, new caps were regenerated. This suggested that the hereditary information was located in the nucleus-containing foot of each cell.


{image:'Figure_10_1_footandcap}
        

In another set of experiments, Hämmerling used two species of  *Acetabularia* that have different cap morphologies,  *A. crenulata* and  *A. mediterranea* ({'Figure_10_1_AcetabCap Figure 10.1.AcetabCap}). He cut the caps from both types of cells and then grafted the stalk from an  *A. crenulata* onto an  *A. mediterranea* foot, and vice versa. Over time, he observed that the grafted cell with the  *A. crenulata* foot and  *A. mediterranea* stalk developed a cap with the  *A. crenulata* morphology. Conversely, the grafted cell with the  *A. mediterranea* foot and  *A. crenulata* stalk developed a cap with the  *A. mediterranea* morphology. He microscopically confirmed the presence of nuclei in the feet of these cells and attributed the development of these cap morphologies to the nucleus of each grafted cell. Thus, he showed experimentally that the  **nucleus** was the location of genetic material that dictated a cell’s properties.


{image:'Figure_10_1_AcetabCap}
        

Another microbial model, the red bread mold  **Neurospora crassa**, was used by George Beadle and Edward Tatum to demonstrate the relationship between genes and the proteins they encode. Beadle had worked with fruit flies in  **Morgan**’s laboratory but found them too complex to perform certain types of experiments.  *N. crassa*, on the other hand, is a simpler organism and has the ability to grow on a minimal medium because it contains enzymatic pathways that allow it to use the medium to produce its own vitamins and amino acids.

 **Beadle and Tatum** irradiated the mold with X-rays to induce changes to a sequence of nucleic acids, called  **mutations**. They mated the irradiated mold spores and attempted to grow them on both a complete medium and a minimal medium. They looked for  **mutants** that grew on a complete medium, supplemented with vitamins and amino acids, but did not grow on the minimal medium lacking these supplements. Such molds theoretically contained mutations in the genes that encoded biosynthetic pathways. Upon finding such mutants, they systematically tested each to determine which vitamin or amino acid it was unable to produce ({'Figure_10_1_X-rayMold Figure 10.1.X-rayMold}) and published this work in 1941.


{image:'Figure_10_1_X-rayMold}
        

Subsequent work by Beadle, Tatum, and colleagues showed that they could isolate different classes of mutants that required a particular supplement, like the amino acid arginine ({'Figure_10_1_GeneEnzyme Figure 10.1.GeneEnzyme}). With some knowledge of the arginine biosynthesis pathway, they identified three classes of arginine mutants by supplementing the minimal medium with intermediates (citrulline or ornithine) in the pathway. The three mutants differed in their abilities to grow in each of the media, which led the group of scientists to propose, in 1945, that each type of mutant had a defect in a different gene in the arginine biosynthesis pathway. This led to the so-called  **one gene–one enzyme hypothesis**, which suggested that each gene encodes one enzyme.

Subsequent knowledge about the processes of  **transcription** and  **translation** led scientists to revise this to the “one gene–one polypeptide” hypothesis. Although there are some genes that do not encode polypeptides (but rather encode for transfer RNAs [tRNAs] or ribosomal RNAs [rRNAs], which we will discuss later), the one gene–one enzyme hypothesis is true in many cases, especially in microbes. Beadle and Tatum’s discovery of the link between genes and corresponding characteristics earned them the 1958 Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine and has since become the basis for modern molecular genetics.


{image:'Figure_10_1_GeneEnzyme}
        
