index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **DNA** was discovered and characterized long before its role in heredity was understood. Microbiologists played significant roles in demonstrating that DNA is the hereditary information found within cells.
  * In the 1850s and 1860s, Gregor Mendel experimented with true-breeding garden peas to demonstrate the  **heritability** of specific observable traits.
  * In 1869, Friedrich Miescher isolated and purified a compound rich in phosphorus from the nuclei of white blood cells; he named the compound nuclein. Miescher’s student Richard Altmann discovered its acidic nature, renaming it  **nucleic acid**. Albrecht Kossell characterized the  **nucleotide bases** found within nucleic acids.
  * Although Walter Sutton and Theodor Boveri proposed the  **Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance** in 1902, it was not scientifically demonstrated until the 1915 publication of the work of Thomas Hunt Morgan and his colleagues.
  * Using  *Acetabularia,* a large algal cell, as his model system, Joachim Hämmerling demonstrated in the 1930s and 1940s that the nucleus was the location of hereditary information in these cells.
  * In the 1940s, George Beadle and Edward Tatum used the mold  *Neurospora crassa* to show that each protein’s production was under the control of a single gene, demonstrating the  **“one gene–one enzyme” hypothesis**.
  * In 1928, Frederick Griffith showed that dead encapsulated bacteria could pass genetic information to live nonencapsulated bacteria and transform them into harmful strains. In 1944, Oswald Avery, Colin McLeod, and Maclyn McCarty identified the compound as DNA.
  * The nature of DNA as the molecule that stores genetic information was unequivocally demonstrated in the experiment of Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase published in 1952. Labeled DNA from bacterial viruses entered and infected bacterial cells, giving rise to more viral particles. The labeled protein coats did not participate in the transmission of genetic information.
