index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.9.1
title: 10.9.1 - Multi-variable Approaches

Multi-variable studies provide one approach to gain a more comprehensive view across the climate system, although there have been relatively few applications of multi-variable {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution detection} and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution studies} in the literature. A combined analysis of near-{Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} from weather stations and free {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} temperatures from radiosondes detected an {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} influence on the joint changes in temperatures near the surface and aloft ({cite.10.'Jones_et_al_2003}). In a Bayesian application of detection and attribution {cite.10.'Schnur_and_Hasselmann_2005 Schnur and Hasselmann (2005)} combined {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature}, {Glossary.*Diurnal_temperature_range diurnal temperature range} and precipitation into a single analysis and showed strong net evidence for detection of {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings} despite low {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} ratios for diurnal temperature range and precipitation on their own. {cite.10.'Barnett_et_al_2008 Barnett et al. (2008)} applied a multi-variable approach in analysing changes in the hydrology of the Western United States (see also {Chapters.10.10_3.10_3_2.10_3_2_3 Section 10.3.2.3}).

The potential for a multi-variable analysis to have greater power to discriminate between forced changes and {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} has been demonstrated by {cite.10.'Stott_and_Jones_2009 Stott and Jones (2009)} and {cite.10.'Pierce_et_al_2012 Pierce et al. (2012)}. In the former case, they showed that a multi-variable {Glossary.*Fingerprint fingerprint} consisting of the responses of GMST and sub-tropical Atlantic salinity has a higher S/N ratio than the fingerprints of each variable separately. They found reduced detection times as a result of low correlations between the two variables in the control simulation although the detection result depends on the ability of the models to represent the co-variability of the variables concerned. Multi-variable attribution studies potentially provide a stronger test of {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} than single variable attribution studies although there can be sensitivity to weighting of different components of the multi-variable fingerprint. In an analysis of ocean variables, {cite.10.'Pierce_et_al_2012 Pierce et al. (2012)} found that the joint analysis of temperature and salinity changes yielded a stronger signal of climate change than ‘either salinity or temperature alone’.

Further insights can be gained by considering a synthesis of evidence across the climate system. This is the subject of the next subsection.
