index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Prokaryotic cells differ from eukaryotic cells in that their genetic material is contained in a  **nucleoid** rather than a membrane-bound nucleus. In addition, prokaryotic cells generally lack membrane-bound organelles.
  * Prokaryotic cells of the same species typically share a similar  **cell morphology** and  **cellular arrangement**.
  * Most prokaryotic cells have a  **cell wall** that helps the organism maintain cellular morphology and protects it against changes in osmotic pressure.
  * Outside of the nucleoid, prokaryotic cells may contain extrachromosomal DNA in  **plasmids**.
  * Prokaryotic  **ribosomes** that are found in the cytoplasm have a size of 70S.
  * Some prokaryotic cells have  **inclusions** that store nutrients or chemicals for other uses.
  * Some prokaryotic cells are able to form  **endospores** through  **sporulation** to survive in a dormant state when conditions are unfavorable. Endospores can  **germinate**, transforming back into  **vegetative cells** when conditions improve.
  * In prokaryotic cells, the  **cell envelope** includes a  **plasma membrane** and usually a cell wall.
  * Bacterial membranes are composed of phospholipids with integral or peripheral proteins. The fatty acid components of these phospholipids are ester-linked and are often used to identify specific types of bacteria. The proteins serve a variety of functions, including transport, cell-to-cell communication, and sensing environmental conditions. Archaeal membranes are distinct in that they are composed of fatty acids that are ether-linked to phospholipids.
  * Some molecules can move across the bacterial membrane by simple diffusion, but most large molecules must be actively transported through membrane structures using cellular energy.
  * Prokaryotic cell walls may be composed of  **peptidoglycan** (bacteria) or  **pseudopeptidoglycan** (archaea).
  * Gram-positive bacterial cells are characterized by a thick  **peptidoglycan** layer, whereas gram-negative bacterial cells are characterized by a thin peptidoglycan layer surrounded by an outer membrane.
  * Some prokaryotic cells produce  **glycocalyx** coatings, such as  **capsules** and  **slime layers**, that aid in attachment to surfaces and/or evasion of the host immune system.
  * Some prokaryotic cells have  **fimbriae** or  **pili**, filamentous appendages that aid in attachment to surfaces. Pili are also used in the transfer of genetic material between cells.
  * Some prokaryotic cells use one or more  **flagella** to move through water.  **Peritrichous** bacteria, which have numerous flagella, use  **runs** and  **tumbles** to move purposefully in the direction of a chemical attractant.
