index: hide
name: Inclusions

As single-celled organisms living in unstable environments, some prokaryotic cells have the ability to store excess nutrients within cytoplasmic structures called  **inclusions**. Storing nutrients in a polymerized form is advantageous because it reduces the buildup of osmotic pressure that occurs as a cell accumulates solutes. Various types of inclusions store glycogen and starches, which contain carbon that cells can access for energy.  **Volutin** granules, also called  **metachromatic granules** because of their staining characteristics, are inclusions that store polymerized inorganic phosphate that can be used in metabolism and assist in the formation of biofilms. Microbes known to contain volutin granules include the archaea  *Methanosarcina*, the bacterium  **Corynebacterium diphtheriae**, and the unicellular eukaryotic alga  *Chlamydomonas*. Sulfur granules, another type of inclusion, are found in sulfur bacteria of the genus  *Thiobacillus*; these granules store elemental sulfur, which the bacteria use for metabolism.

Occasionally, certain types of inclusions are surrounded by a phospholipid monolayer embedded with protein.  **Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB)**, which can be produced by species of  *Bacillus* and  *Pseudomonas*, is an example of an inclusion that displays this type of monolayer structure. Industrially, PHB has also been used as a source of biodegradable polymers for bioplastics. Several different types of inclusions are shown in {'Figure_3_3_IncBodies Figure 3.3.IncBodies}.


{image:'Figure_3_3_IncBodies}
        

Some prokaryotic cells have other types of inclusions that serve purposes other than nutrient storage. For example, some prokaryotic cells produce gas vacuoles, accumulations of small, protein-lined vesicles of gas. These gas vacuoles allow the prokaryotic cells that synthesize them to alter their buoyancy so that they can adjust their location in the water column. Magnetotactic bacteria, such as  **Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum**, contain  **magnetosomes**, which are inclusions of magnetic iron oxide or iron sulfide surrounded by a lipid layer. These allow cells to align along a magnetic field, aiding their movement ({'Figure_3_3_IncBodies Figure 3.3.IncBodies}). Cyanobacteria such as  **Anabaena cylindrica** and bacteria such as  **Halothiobacillus neapolitanus** produce  **carboxysome** inclusions. Carboxysomes are composed of outer shells of thousands of protein subunits. Their interior is filled with ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) and carbonic anhydrase. Both of these compounds are used for carbon metabolism. Some prokaryotic cells also possess carboxysomes that sequester functionally related enzymes in one location. These structures are considered proto-organelles because they compartmentalize important compounds or chemical reactions, much like many eukaryotic organelles.
