index: hide
name: Filamentous Appendages

Many bacterial cells have protein appendages embedded within their cell envelopes that extend outward, allowing interaction with the environment. These appendages can attach to other surfaces, transfer DNA, or provide movement. Filamentous appendages include fimbriae, pili, and flagella.

## Fimbriae and Pili

Fimbriae and pili are structurally similar and, because differentiation between the two is problematic, these terms are often used interchangeably. The term  **fimbriae** commonly refers to short bristle-like proteins projecting from the cell surface by the hundreds. Fimbriae enable a cell to attach to surfaces and to other cells. For pathogenic bacteria, adherence to host cells is important for colonization, infectivity, and virulence. Adherence to surfaces is also important in biofilm formation.

The term  **pili** (singular: pilus) commonly refers to longer, less numerous protein appendages that aid in attachment to surfaces ({'Figure_3_3_FimbrPili Figure 3.3.FimbrPili}). A specific type of pilus, called the  **F pilus** or  **sex pilus**, is important in the transfer of DNA between bacterial cells, which occurs between members of the same generation when two cells physically transfer or exchange parts of their respective genomes (see <link:>).


{image:'Figure_3_3_FimbrPili}
        

## Flagella

 **Flagella** are structures used by cells to move in aqueous environments. Bacterial flagella act like propellers. They are stiff spiral filaments composed of flagellin protein subunits that extend outward from the cell and spin in solution. The  **basal body** is the motor for the flagellum and is embedded in the plasma membrane ({'Figure_3_3_BaFlagella Figure 3.3.BaFlagella}). A hook region connects the basal body to the filament. Gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria have different basal body configurations due to differences in cell wall structure.

Different types of motile bacteria exhibit different arrangements of flagella ({'Figure_3_3_FlagellaAr Figure 3.3.FlagellaAr}). A bacterium with a singular flagellum, typically located at one end of the cell (polar), is said to have a  **monotrichous** flagellum. An example of a monotrichously flagellated bacterial pathogen is  *Vibrio cholerae*, the gram-negative bacterium that causes cholera. Cells with  **amphitrichous** flagella have a flagellum or tufts of flagella at each end. An example is  **Spirillum minor**, the cause of spirillary (Asian)  **rat-bite fever** or sodoku. Cells with  **lophotrichous** flagella have a tuft at one end of the cell. The gram-negative bacillus  **Pseudomonas aeruginosa**, an opportunistic pathogen known for causing many infections, including “swimmer’s ear” and burn wound infections, has lophotrichous flagella. Flagella that cover the entire surface of a bacterial cell are called  **peritrichous** flagella. The gram-negative bacterium  *E. coli* shows a peritrichous arrangement of flagella.


{image:'Figure_3_3_BaFlagella}
        


{image:'Figure_3_3_FlagellaAr}
        

Directional movement depends on the configuration of the flagella. Bacteria can move in response to a variety of environmental signals, including light ( **phototaxis**), magnetic fields ( **magnetotaxis**) using magnetosomes, and, most commonly, chemical gradients ( **chemotaxis**). Purposeful movement toward a chemical attractant, like a food source, or away from a repellent, like a poisonous chemical, is achieved by increasing the length of  **runs** and decreasing the length of  **tumbles**. When running, flagella rotate in a counterclockwise direction, allowing the bacterial cell to move forward. In a peritrichous bacterium, the flagella are all bundled together in a very streamlined way ({'Figure_3_3_RunTumble Figure 3.3.RunTumble}), allowing for efficient movement. When tumbling, flagella are splayed out while rotating in a clockwise direction, creating a looping motion and preventing meaningful forward movement but reorienting the cell toward the direction of the attractant. When an attractant exists, runs and tumbles still occur; however, the length of runs is longer, while the length of the tumbles is reduced, allowing overall movement toward the higher concentration of the attractant. When no chemical gradient exists, the lengths of runs and tumbles are more equal, and overall movement is more random ({'Figure_3_3_DirectRand Figure 3.3.DirectRand}).


{image:'Figure_3_3_RunTumble}
        


{image:'Figure_3_3_DirectRand}
        
