index: hide
name: Plasma Membrane

Structures that enclose the cytoplasm and internal structures of the cell are known collectively as the  **cell envelope**. In prokaryotic cells, the structures of the cell envelope vary depending on the type of cell and organism. Most (but not all) prokaryotic cells have a  **cell wall**, but the makeup of this cell wall varies. All cells (prokaryotic and eukaryotic) have a  **plasma membrane** (also called  **cytoplasmic membrane** or  **cell membrane**) that exhibits selective permeability, allowing some molecules to enter or leave the cell while restricting the passage of others.

The structure of the plasma membrane is often described in terms of the  **fluid mosaic model**, which refers to the ability of membrane components to move fluidly within the plane of the membrane, as well as the mosaic-like composition of the components, which include a diverse array of lipid and protein components ({'Figure_3_3_PlasmaMem Figure 3.3.PlasmaMem}). The plasma membrane structure of most bacterial and eukaryotic cell types is a bilayer composed mainly of phospholipids formed with ester linkages and proteins. These phospholipids and proteins have the ability to move laterally within the plane of the membranes as well as between the two phospholipid layers.


{image:'Figure_3_3_PlasmaMem}
        

Archaeal membranes are fundamentally different from bacterial and eukaryotic membranes in a few significant ways. First,  **archaeal membrane** phospholipids are formed with ether linkages, in contrast to the ester linkages found in bacterial or eukaryotic cell membranes. Second, archaeal phospholipids have branched chains, whereas those of bacterial and eukaryotic cells are straight chained. Finally, although some archaeal membranes can be formed of bilayers like those found in bacteria and eukaryotes, other archaeal plasma membranes are lipid monolayers.

Proteins on the cell’s surface are important for a variety of functions, including cell-to-cell communication, and sensing environmental conditions and pathogenic virulence factors. Membrane proteins and phospholipids may have carbohydrates (sugars) associated with them and are called glycoproteins or glycolipids, respectively. These glycoprotein and glycolipid complexes extend out from the surface of the cell, allowing the cell to interact with the external environment ({'Figure_3_3_PlasmaMem Figure 3.3.PlasmaMem}). Glycoproteins and glycolipids in the plasma membrane can vary considerably in chemical composition among archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes, allowing scientists to use them to characterize unique species.

Plasma membranes from different cells types also contain unique phospholipids, which contain fatty acids. As described in <link:>,  **phospholipid-derived fatty acid analysis (PLFA)** profiles can be used to identify unique types of cells based on differences in fatty acids. Archaea, bacteria, and eukaryotes each have a unique PFLA profile.

## Membrane Transport Mechanisms

One of the most important functions of the plasma membrane is to control the transport of molecules into and out of the cell. Internal conditions must be maintained within a certain range despite any changes in the external environment. The transport of substances across the plasma membrane allows cells to do so.

Cells use various modes of transport across the plasma membrane. For example, molecules moving from a higher concentration to a lower concentration with the concentration gradient are transported by  **simple diffusion**, also known as  **passive transport** ({'Figure_3_3_simplediff Figure 3.3.simplediff}). Some small molecules, like carbon dioxide, may cross the membrane bilayer directly by simple diffusion. However, charged molecules, as well as large molecules, need the help of carriers or channels in the membrane. These structures ferry molecules across the membrane, a process known as  **facilitated diffusion** ({'Figure_3_3_facdiff Figure 3.3.facdiff}).

Active transport occurs when cells move molecules across their membrane  *against* concentration gradients ({'Figure_3_3_Transport Figure 3.3.Transport}). A major difference between passive and  **active transport** is that active transport requires adenosine triphosphate (ATP) or other forms of energy to move molecules “uphill.” Therefore, active transport structures are often called “pumps.”


{image:'Figure_3_3_simplediff}
        


{image:'Figure_3_3_facdiff}
        


{image:'Figure_3_3_Transport}
        

Group translocation also transports substances into bacterial cells. In this case, as a molecule moves into a cell against its concentration gradient, it is chemically modified so that it does not require transport against an unfavorable concentration gradient. A common example of this is the bacterial phosphotransferase system, a series of carriers that phosphorylates (i.e., adds phosphate ions to) glucose or other sugars upon entry into cells. Since the phosphorylation of sugars is required during the early stages of sugar metabolism, the phosphotransferase system is considered to be an energy neutral system.

## Photosynthetic Membrane Structures

Some prokaryotic cells, namely  **cyanobacteria** and  **photosynthetic bacteria**, have membrane structures that enable them to perform photosynthesis. These structures consist of an infolding of the plasma membrane that encloses photosynthetic pigments such as green  **chlorophylls** and  **bacteriochlorophylls**. In cyanobacteria, these membrane structures are called thylakoids; in photosynthetic bacteria, they are called chromatophores, lamellae, or chlorosomes.
