index: hide
name: Endospores

Bacterial cells are generally observed as  **vegetative cells**, but some genera of bacteria have the ability to form  **endospores**, structures that essentially protect the bacterial genome in a dormant state when environmental conditions are unfavorable. Endospores (not to be confused with the reproductive spores formed by fungi) allow some bacterial cells to survive long periods without food or water, as well as exposure to chemicals, extreme temperatures, and even radiation.  compares the characteristics of vegetative cells and endospores.


****

| Vegetative Cells | Endospores |
|:-:|:-:|
| Sensitive to extreme temperatures and radiation | Resistant to extreme temperatures and radiation |
| Gram-positive | Do not absorb Gram stain, only special endospore stains (see <link:>) |
| Normal water content and enzymatic activity | Dehydrated; no metabolic activity |
| Capable of active growth and metabolism | Dormant; no growth or metabolic activity |
    

The process by which vegetative cells transform into endospores is called  **sporulation**, and it generally begins when nutrients become depleted or environmental conditions become otherwise unfavorable ({'Figure_3_3_Sporulation Figure 3.3.Sporulation}). The process begins with the formation of a septum in the vegetative bacterial cell. The septum divides the cell asymmetrically, separating a DNA forespore from the mother cell. The forespore, which will form the core of the endospore, is essentially a copy of the cell’s chromosomes, and is separated from the mother cell by a second membrane. A cortex gradually forms around the forespore by laying down layers of calcium and dipicolinic acid between membranes. A protein spore coat then forms around the cortex while the DNA of the mother cell disintegrates. Further maturation of the endospore occurs with the formation of an outermost exosporium. The endospore is released upon disintegration of the mother cell, completing sporulation.


{image:'Figure_3_3_Sporulation}
        

Endospores of certain species have been shown to persist in a dormant state for extended periods of time, up to thousands of years. However, when living conditions improve, endospores undergo  **germination**, reentering a vegetative state. After germination, the cell becomes metabolically active again and is able to carry out all of its normal functions, including growth and cell division.

Not all bacteria have the ability to form endospores; however, there are a number of clinically significant endospore-forming gram-positive bacteria of the genera  *Bacillus* and  *Clostridium*. These include  *B. anthracis*, the causative agent of  **anthrax**, which produces endospores capable of survive for many decades;  *C. tetani* (causes  **tetanus**);  *C. difficile* (causes pseudomembranous  **colitis**);  *C. perfringens* (causes  **gas gangrene**); and  *C. botulinum* (causes  **botulism**). Pathogens such as these are particularly difficult to combat because their endospores are so hard to kill. Special sterilization methods for endospore-forming bacteria are discussed in <link:>.
