index: hide
name: Cryptococcocal Meningitis

 **Cryptococcus neoformans** is a fungal pathogen that can cause meningitis. This yeast is commonly found in soils and is particularly associated with pigeon droppings. It has a thick capsule that serves as an important  **virulence factor**, inhibiting clearance by phagocytosis. Most  *C. neoformans* cases result in subclinical respiratory infections that, in healthy individuals, generally resolve spontaneously with no long-term consequences (see <link:>). In immunocompromised patients or those with other underlying illnesses, the infection can progress to cause  **meningitis** and granuloma formation in brain tissues.  *Cryptococcus* antigens can also serve to inhibit cell-mediated immunity and delayed-type hypersensitivity.

 *Cryptococcus* can be easily cultured in the laboratory and identified based on its extensive capsule ({'Figure_26_4_Cryptococc Figure 26.4.Cryptococc}).  *C. neoformans* is frequently cultured from urine samples of patients with disseminated infections.

Prolonged treatment with antifungal drugs is required to treat cryptococcal infections. Combined therapy is required with  **amphotericin B** plus  **flucytosine** for at least 10 weeks. Many antifungal drugs have difficulty crossing the  **blood-brain barrier** and have strong side effects that necessitate low doses; these factors contribute to the lengthy time of treatment. Patients with AIDS are particularly susceptible to  *Cryptococcus* infections because of their compromised immune state.  **AIDS** patients with cryptococcosis can also be treated with antifungal drugs, but they often have relapses; lifelong doses of fluconazole may be necessary to prevent reinfection.


{image:'Figure_26_4_Cryptococc}
        
