index: hide
name: Granulomatous Amoebic Encephalitis

 **Acanthamoeba** and  **Balamuthia** species are free-living amoebae found in many bodies of fresh water. Human infections by these amoebae are rare. However, they can cause  **amoebic keratitis** in contact lens wearers (see <link:>), disseminated infections in immunocompromised patients, and  **granulomatous amoebic encephalitis (GAE)** in severe cases. Compared to PAM, GAE tend to be subacute infections. The microbe is thought to enter through either the nasal sinuses or breaks in the skin. It is disseminated hematogenously and can invade the CNS. There, the infections lead to inflammation, formation of lesions, and development of typical neurological symptoms of encephalitis ({'Figure_26_4_AmoeEnceph Figure 26.4.AmoeEnceph}). GAE is nearly always fatal.

GAE is often not diagnosed until late in the infection. Lesions caused by the infection can be detected using CT or MRI. The live amoebae can be directly detected in CSF or tissue biopsies. Serological tests are available but generally are not necessary to make a correct diagnosis, since the presence of the organism in  **CSF** is definitive. Some antifungal drugs, like  **fluconazole**, have been used to treat acanthamoebal infections. In addition, a combination of  **miltefosine** and  **voriconazole** (an inhibitor of ergosterol biosynthesis) has recently been used to successfully treat GAE. Even with treatment, however, the mortality rate for patients with these infections is high.


{image:'Figure_26_4_AmoeEnceph}
        
