index: hide
name: Acanthamoeba Infections

#  *Acanthamoeba* Infections

 **Acanthamoeba** is a genus of free-living protozoan amoebae that are common in soils and unchlorinated bodies of fresh water. (This is one reason why some swimming pools are treated with chlorine.) The genus contains a few parasitic species, some of which can cause infections of the eyes, skin, and nervous system. Such infections can sometimes travel and affect other body systems. Skin infections may manifest as abscesses, ulcers, and nodules. When acanthamoebae infect the eye *,* causing inflammation of the cornea, the condition is called  **Acanthamoeba keratitis**. {'Figure_21_5_acanthaLC Figure 21.5.acanthaLC} illustrates the  *Acanthamoeba* life cycle and various modes of infection.

While  *Acanthamoeba* keratitis is initially mild, it can lead to severe corneal damage, vision impairment, or even blindness if left untreated. Similar to eye infections involving  *P. aeruginosa, Acanthamoeba* poses a much greater risk to wearers of  **contact lenses** because the amoeba can thrive in the space between contact lenses and the cornea. Prevention through proper contact lens care is important. Lenses should always be properly disinfected prior to use, and should never be worn while swimming or using a hot tub.

 *Acanthamoeba* can also enter the body through other pathways, including skin wounds and the respiratory tract. It usually does not cause disease except in immunocompromised individuals; however, in rare cases, the infection can spread to the nervous system, resulting in a usually fatal condition called  **granulomatous amoebic encephalitis (GAE)** (see <link:>). Disseminated infections, lesions, and  *Acanthamoeba* keratitis can be diagnosed by observing symptoms and examining patient samples under the microscope to view the parasite. Skin biopsies may be used.

 **Acanthamoeba keratitis** is difficult to treat, and prompt treatment is necessary to prevent the condition from progressing. The condition generally requires three to four weeks of intensive treatment to resolve. Common treatments include topical antiseptics (e.g.,  **polyhexamethylene biguanide**,  **chlorhexidine**, or both), sometimes with painkillers or  **corticosteroids** (although the latter are controversial because they suppress the immune system, which can worsen the infection). Azoles are sometimes prescribed as well. Advanced cases of keratitis may require a corneal transplant to prevent blindness.


{image:'Figure_21_5_acanthaLC}
        


{image:'Figure_21_5_acanthamoe}
        
