index: hide
name: Cleavage and Blastula Stage

The development of multi-cellular organisms begins from a single-celled zygote, which undergoes rapid cell division to form the blastula. The rapid, multiple rounds of cell division are termed cleavage. Cleavage is illustrated in ({'Figure_43_5_2b Figure 43.5.2b} **a**). After the cleavage has produced over 100 cells, the embryo is called a blastula. The blastula is usually a spherical layer of cells (the blastoderm) surrounding a fluid-filled or yolk-filled cavity (the blastocoel). Mammals at this stage form a structure called the blastocyst, characterized by an inner cell mass that is distinct from the surrounding blastula, shown in {'Figure_43_5_2b Figure 43.5.2b} **b**. During cleavage, the cells divide without an increase in mass; that is, one large single-celled zygote divides into multiple smaller cells. Each cell within the blastula is called a blastomere.


{image:'Figure_43_5_2b}
        
{image:'Figure_43_5_2a}
        

Cleavage can take place in two ways:  **holoblastic** (total) cleavage or  **meroblastic** (partial) cleavage. The type of cleavage depends on the amount of yolk in the eggs. In placental mammals (including humans) where nourishment is provided by the mother’s body, the eggs have a very small amount of yolk and undergo holoblastic cleavage. Other species, such as birds, with a lot of yolk in the egg to nourish the embryo during development, undergo meroblastic cleavage.

In mammals, the blastula forms the  **blastocyst** in the next stage of development. Here the cells in the blastula arrange themselves in two layers: the  **inner cell mass**, and an outer layer called the  **trophoblast**. The inner cell mass is also known as the embryoblast and this mass of cells will go on to form the embryo. At this stage of development, illustrated in {'Figure_43_5_3 Figure 43.5.3} the inner cell mass consists of embryonic stem cells that will differentiate into the different cell types needed by the organism. The trophoblast will contribute to the placenta and nourish the embryo.


{image:'Figure_43_5_3}
        
