index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 1.4.3
title: 1.4.3 - Treatment of Uncertainty in IPCC

In the course of the IPCC assessment procedure, chapter teams review the published research literature, document the findings (including {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}), assess the scientific merit of this information, identify the key findings, and attempt to express an appropriate measure of the uncertainty that accompanies these findings using a shared guidance procedure. This process has changed over time. The early Assessment Reports ({cite.1.'IPCC_1990 FAR} and {cite.1.'IPCC_1996 SAR}) were largely qualitative. As the field has grown and matured, uncertainty is being treated more explicitly, with a greater emphasis on the expression, where possible and appropriate, of quantified measures of uncertainty.

Although IPCC’s treatment of uncertainty has become more sophisticated since the early reports, the rapid growth and considerable diversity of climate research literature presents ongoing challenges. In the wake of the {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} the IPCC formed a Cross-Working Group team charged with identifying the issues and compiling a set of Uncertainty Guidance Notes that could provide a structure for consistent treatment of uncertainty across the IPCC’s remit ({cite.1.'Manning_et_al_2004}). These expanded on the procedural elements of {cite.1.'Moss_and_Schneider_2000 Moss and Schneider (2000)} and introduced calibrated language scales designed to enable chapter teams to use the appropriate level of precision to describe findings. These notes were revised between the TAR and {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} and again between AR4 and AR5 ({cite.1.'Mastrandrea_et_al_2010}).

Recently, increased engagement of social scientists (e.g., {cite.1.'Patt_and_Schrag_2003}; {cite.1.'Kandlikar_et_al_2005}; {cite.1.'Risbey_and_Kandlikar_2007}; {cite.1.'Broomell_and_Budescu_2009}; {cite.1.'Budescu_et_al_2009}; {cite.1.'CCSP_2009}) and expert advisory panels ({cite.1.'CCSP_2009}; InterAcademy Council, 2010) in the area of uncertainty and climate change has helped clarify issues and procedures to improve presentation of uncertainty. Many of the recommendations of these groups are addressed in the revised Guidance Notes. One key revision relates to clarification of the relationship between the ‘confidence’ and ‘{Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood}’ language, and pertains to demarcation between qualitative descriptions of ‘confidence’ and the numerical representations of uncertainty that are expressed by the likelihood scale. In addition, a finding that includes a probabilistic measure of uncertainty does not require explicit mention of the level of confidence associated with that finding if the level of confidence is high or very high. This is a concession to stylistic clarity and readability: if something is described as having a high likelihood, then in the absence of additional qualifiers it should be inferred that it also has high or very high confidence.
