index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.3.6.3
title: 11.3.6.3 - Synthesis of Near-term Projections of Global Mean Surface Air Temperature

{'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25} provides a synthesis of near-term {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of global mean surface air temperature ({Topics.*Surface_Temperature GMST}) from CMIP5, CMIP3 and studies that have attempted to use observations to quantify {Glossary.*Projection projection} uncertainty (see {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_2.11_3_2_1 Section 11.3.2.1}). On the basis of this evidence, an attempt is made here to assess a likely range for GMST in the period 2016–2035. Such an overall assessment is not straightforward. The following points must be taken into account:

1. No likelihoods are associated with the different RCP {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}. For this reason, previous IPCC Assessment Reports have only presented projections that are conditional on specific scenarios. Here we attempt a broader assessment across all four RCP scenarios. This is possible only because, as discussed in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6.11_3_6_1 Section 11.3.6.1}, near-term projections of GMST are not especially sensitive to these different scenarios.
2. In the near term it is expected that increases in GMST will be driven by past and future increases in GHG concentrations and future decreases in {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} aerosols, as found in all the RCP scenarios. {'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25}c shows that in the near term the CMIP3 projections based on the {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} are generally cooler than the CMIP5 projections based on the RCP scenarios. This difference is at least partly attributable to higher {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} concentrations in the SRES scenarios (see {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6.11_3_6_1 Section 11.3.6.1}).
3. The CMIP3 and CMIP5 projections are ensembles of opportunity, and it is explicitly recognized that there are sources of uncertainty not simulated by the models. Evidence of this can be seen by comparing the {cite.11.'Rowlands_et_al_2012 Rowlands et al. (2012)} projections for the A1B scenario, which were obtained using a very large {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} in which the physics parameterizations were perturbed in a single {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model}, with the corresponding raw multi-model CMIP3 projections. The former exhibit a substantially larger likely range than the latter. A pragmatic approach to addressing this issue, which was used in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} and is also used in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12}, is to consider the 5 to 95% CMIP3/5 range as a ‘likely’ rather than ‘very likely’ range.
4. As discussed in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6.11_3_6_2 Section 11.3.6.2}, the RCP scenarios assume no underlying {Glossary.*Trend trend} in total solar irradiance and no future volcanic eruptions. Future volcanic eruptions cannot be predicted and there is low confidence in projected changes in solar irradiance ({Chapters.8 Chapter 8}). Consequently the possible effects of future changes in natural forcings are excluded from the assessment here.
5. As discussed in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_2.11_3_2_1.11_3_2_1_1 Section 11.3.2.1.1} observationally constrained ‘ASK’ projections ({cite.11.'Gillett_et_al_2013}; {cite.11.'Stott_et_al_2013}) are 10 to 15% cooler (median values for RCP4.5; 6–10% cooler for {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}), and have a narrower range, than the corresponding ‘raw’ (uninitialized) CMIP5 projections. The reduced rate of warming in the ASK projections is related to evidence from {Chapters.10 Chapter 10} ({Chapters.10.10_3.10_3_1 Section 10.3.1}) that ‘some CMIP5 models have a higher transient response to {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} and a larger response to other {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings} (dominated by the effects of aerosols) than the real world (medium confidence).’ These models may warm too rapidly as GHGs increase and aerosols decline.
6. Over the last two decades the observed rate of increase in GMST has been at the lower end of rates simulated by CMIP5 models ({'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25}a). This hiatus in GMST rise is discussed in detail in {Box_9_2 Box 9.2} ({Chapters.9 Chapter 9}), where it is concluded that the hiatus is attributable, in roughly equal measure, to a decline in the rate of increase in {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} and a cooling contribution from {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} (expert judgment, medium confidence). The decline in the rate of increase in ERF is {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} primarily to natural (solar and volcanic) forcing but there is low confidence in quantifying the role of forcing trend in causing the hiatus, because of uncertainty in the magnitude of the volcanic forcing trend and low confidence in the aerosol forcing trend. Concerning the higher rate of warming in CMIP5 simulations it is concluded that there is a substantial contribution from internal variability but that errors in ERF and in model responses may also contribute. There is low confidence in this assessment because of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in aerosol forcing in particular. The observed hiatus has important implications for near-term projections of GMST. A basic issue concerns the sensitivity of projections to the choice of reference period. {'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25}b and c shows the 5 to 95% ranges for CMIP5 projections using a 1986–2005 reference period (light grey), and the same projections using a 2006–2012 reference period (dark grey). The latter projections are cooler, and the effect of using a more recent reference period appears similar to the effect of initialization (discussed in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_2.11_3_2_1.11_3_2_1_1 Section 11.3.2.1.1} and shown in {'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25}c for RCP4.5). Using this more recent reference period, the 5 to 95% range for the mean GMST in 2016–2035 relative to 1986–2005 is 0.36°C to 0.79°C (using all RCP scenarios, weighted to ensure equal weights per model and using an estimate of the observed GMST anomaly for (2006– 2012)–(1986–2005) of 0.16°C). This range may be compared with the range of 0.48°C to 1.15°C obtained from the CMIP5 models using the original 1986–2005 reference period.
7. In view of the sensitivity of projections to the reference period it is helpful to consider the possible rate of change of GMST in the near term. The CMIP5 5 to 95% ranges for GMST trends in the period 2012–2035 are 0.11°C to 0.41°C per decade. This range is similar to, though slightly narrower than, the range found by {cite.11.'Easterling_and_Wehner_2009 Easterling and Wehner (2009)} for the CMIP3 SRES A2 scenario over the longer period 2000–2050. It may also be compared with recent rates in the observational record (e.g., ~0.26°C per decade for 1984–1998 and ~0.04°C per decade for hiatus period 1998–2012; See {Box_9_2 Box 9.2}). The RCP scenarios project that ERF will increase more rapidly in the near term than occurred over the hiatus period (see {Box_9_2 Box 9.2} and Annex II), which is consistent with more rapid warming. In addition, {Box_9_2 Box 9.2} includes an assessment that internal variability is more likely than not to make a positive contribution to the increase in GMST in the near term. Internal variability is included in the CMIP5 projections, but because most of the CMIP5 simulations do not reproduce the observed reduction in global mean surface warming over the last 10 to 15 years, the distribution of CMIP5 near-term trends will not reflect this assessment and might, as a result, be biased low. This uncertainty, however, is somewhat counter balanced by the evidence of point 5, which suggests a high bias in the distribution of near-term trends. A further projection of GMST for the period 2016–2035 may be obtained by starting from the observed GMST for 2012 (0.14°C relative to 1986–2005) and projecting increases at rates between the 5 to 95% CMIP5 range of 0.11°C to 0.41°C per decade. The resulting range of 0.29°C to 0.69°C, relative to 1986–2005, is shown on {'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25}(c).

{image:'Figure_11_25}

Overall, in the absence of major volcanic eruptions—which would cause significant but temporary cooling—and, assuming no significant future long term changes in solar irradiance, it is likely (>66% probability) that the GMST anomaly for the period 2016–2035, relative to the reference period of 1986–2005 will be in the range 0.3°C to 0.7°C (expert assessment, to one significant figure; medium confidence). This range is consistent, to one significant figure, with the range obtained by using CMIP5 5 to 95% model trends for 2012–2035. It is also consistent with the CMIP5 5 to 95% range for all four RCP scenarios of 0.36°C to 0.79°C, using the 2006–2012 reference period, after the upper and lower bounds are reduced by 10% to take into account the evidence noted under point 5 that some models may be too sensitive to anthropogenic forcing. The 0.3°C to 0.7°C range includes the likely range of the ASK projections and initialized {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} for RCP4.5. It corresponds to a rate of change of GMST between 2012 and 2035 in the range 0.12°C to 0.42°C per decade. The higher rates of change can be associated with a significant positive contribution from internal variability ({Box_9_2 Box 9.2}) and/or high rates of increase in ERF (e.g., as found in RCP8.5). Note that an upper limit of 0.8°C on the 2016–2035 GMST corresponds to a rate of change over the period 2012–2035 of 0.49°C per decade, which is considered unlikely. The assessed rates of change are consistent with the AR4 SPM statement that ‘For the next two decades, a warming of about 0.2°C per decade is projected for a range of SRES emission scenarios’. However, the implied rates of warming over the period from 1986–2005 to 2016–2035 are lower as a result of the hiatus: 0.10°C to 0.23°C per decade, suggesting the AR4 assessment was near the upper end of current expectations for this specific time interval.

The assessment here provides only a likely range for GMST. Possible reasons why the real world might depart from this range include: RF departs significantly from the RCP scenarios, due to either natural (e.g., major volcanic eruptions, changes in solar irradiance) or anthropogenic (e.g., aerosol or GHG {Topics.*Emissions emissions}) causes; processes that are poorly simulated in the CMIP5 models exert a significant influence on GMST. The latter class includes: a possible strong ‘recovery’ from the recent hiatus in GMST; the possibility that models might underestimate decadal variability (but see {Chapters.9.9_5.9_5_3.9_5_3_1 Section 9.5.3.1}); the possibility that model sensitivity to anthropogenic forcing may differ from that of the real world (see point 5); and the possibility of abrupt changes in climate (see introduction to Sections {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6 11.3.6} and {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_5 12.5.5}).

The assessment here has focused on 20-year mean values of GMST for the period 2016–2035. There is no unique method to derive a likely range for annual mean values from the range for 20-year means, so such calculations necessarily involve additional uncertainties (beyond those outlined in the previous paragraph), and lower confidence. Nevertheless, it is useful to attempt to estimate a range for annual mean values, which may be compared with raw model projections and, in the future, with observations. To do so, the following simple approach is used: (1) Starting in 2009 from the observed GMST anomaly for 2006–2012 of 0.16°C (relative to 1986–2005), linear trends are projected over the period 2009–2035 with maximum and minimum gradients selected to be consistent with the 0.3°C to 0.7°C range for the mean GMST in the period 2016–2035; 2). To take into account the expected year-to-year variability of annual mean values, the resulting linear trends are offset by ±0.1°C. The value of 0.1°C is based on the standard deviation of annual means in CMIP5 control runs (to one significant figure). These calculations provide an indicative likely range for annual mean GMST, which is shown as the red hatched area in {'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25}b. Note that this range does not take into account the expected impact of any future volcanic eruptions.

The assessed likely range for GMST in the period 2016–2035 may also be used to assess the {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} that GMST will cross policy-relevant levels, relative to earlier time periods ({cite.11.'Joshi_et_al_2011}). Using the 1850–1900 period, and the observed temperature rise between 1850– 1900 and 1986–2005 of 0.61°C (estimated from the HadCRUT4 data set ({cite.11.'Morice_et_al_2012}) gives a likely range for the GMST anomaly in 2016–2035 of 0.91°C–1.31°C, and supports the following conclusions: it is more likely than not that the mean GMST for the period 2016–2035 will be more than 1°C above the mean for 1850–1900, and very unlikely that it will be more than 1.5°C above the 1850–1900 mean (expert assessment, medium confidence). Additional information about the possibility of GMST crossing specific temperature levels is provided in {'Table_11_3 Table 11.3}, which shows the percentage of CMIP5 models for which the projected change in GMST exceeds specific temperature levels, under each RCP scenario, in two time periods (early century: 2016–2035 and mid-century: 2046–2065), and also using the two different reference periods discussed under point 6 and illustrated in {'Figure_11_25 Figure 11.25}. However, these percentages should not be interpreted as likelihoods because—as discussed in this section—there are sources of uncertainty not captured by the CMIP5 ensemble. Note finally that it is very likely that specific temperature levels will be crossed temporarily in individual years before a permanent crossing is established ({cite.11.'Joshi_et_al_2011}), but {'Table_11_3 Table 11.3} is based on 20-year mean values.

{table:'Table_11_3}
