index: hide
name: Respiratory Volumes and Capacities

 **Respiratory volume** is the term used for various volumes of air moved by or associated with the lungs at a given point in the respiratory cycle. There are four major types of respiratory volumes: tidal, residual, inspiratory reserve, and expiratory reserve ({'Figure_23_3_4 Figure 23.3.4}).  **Tidal volume (TV)** is the amount of air that normally enters the lungs during quiet breathing, which is about 500 milliliters.  **Expiratory reserve volume (ERV)** is the amount of air you can forcefully exhale past a normal tidal expiration, up to 1200 milliliters for men.  **Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)** is produced by a deep inhalation, past a tidal inspiration. This is the extra volume that can be brought into the lungs during a forced inspiration.  **Residual volume (RV)** is the air left in the lungs if you exhale as much air as possible. The residual volume makes breathing easier by preventing the alveoli from collapsing. Respiratory volume is dependent on a variety of factors, and measuring the different types of respiratory volumes can provide important clues about a person’s respiratory health ({'Figure_23_3_5 Figure 23.3.5}).


{image:'Figure_23_3_4}
        


{image:'Figure_23_3_5}
        

Respiratory capacity is the combination of two or more selected volumes, which further describes the amount of air in the lungs during a given time. For example,  **total lung capacity (TLC)** is the sum of all of the lung volumes (TV, ERV, IRV, and RV), which represents the total amount of air a person can hold in the lungs after a forceful inhalation. TLC is about 6000 mL air for men, and about 4200 mL for women.  **Vital capacity (VC)** is the amount of air a person can move into or out of his or her lungs, and is the sum of all of the volumes except residual volume (TV, ERV, and IRV), which is between 4000 and 5000 milliliters.  **Inspiratory capacity (IC)** is the maximum amount of air that can be inhaled past a normal tidal expiration, is the sum of the tidal volume and inspiratory reserve volume. On the other hand, the  **functional residual capacity (FRC)** is the amount of air that remains in the lung after a normal tidal expiration; it is the sum of expiratory reserve volume and residual volume (see {'Figure_23_3_4 Figure 23.3.4}).

In addition to the air that creates respiratory volumes, the respiratory system also contains  **anatomical dead space**, which is air that is present in the airway that never reaches the alveoli and therefore never participates in gas exchange.  **Alveolar dead space** involves air found within alveoli that are unable to function, such as those affected by disease or abnormal blood flow.  **Total dead space** is the anatomical dead space and alveolar dead space together, and represents all of the air in the respiratory system that is not being used in the gas exchange process.
