index: hide
name: Renal Hilum

The  **renal hilum** is the entry and exit site for structures servicing the kidneys: vessels, nerves, lymphatics, and ureters. The medial-facing hila are tucked into the sweeping convex outline of the cortex. Emerging from the hilum is the renal pelvis, which is formed from the major and minor calyxes in the kidney. The smooth muscle in the renal pelvis funnels urine via peristalsis into the ureter. The renal arteries form directly from the descending aorta, whereas the renal veins return cleansed blood directly to the inferior vena cava. The artery, vein, and renal pelvis are arranged in an anterior-to-posterior order.

## Nephrons and Vessels

The renal artery first divides into segmental arteries, followed by further branching to form interlobar arteries that pass through the renal columns to reach the cortex ({'Figure_26_3_3 Figure 26.3.3}). The interlobar arteries, in turn, branch into arcuate arteries, cortical radiate arteries, and then into afferent arterioles. The afferent arterioles service about 1.3 million nephrons in each kidney.


{image:'Figure_26_3_3}
        

 **Nephrons** are the “functional units” of the kidney; they cleanse the blood and balance the constituents of the circulation. The afferent arterioles form a tuft of high-pressure capillaries about 200 µm in diameter, the  **glomerulus**. The rest of the nephron consists of a continuous sophisticated tubule whose proximal end surrounds the glomerulus in an intimate embrace—this is  **Bowman’s capsule**. The glomerulus and Bowman’s capsule together form the  **renal corpuscle**. As mentioned earlier, these glomerular capillaries filter the blood based on particle size. After passing through the renal corpuscle, the capillaries form a second arteriole, the  **efferent arteriole** ({'Figure_26_3_4 Figure 26.3.4}). These will next form a capillary network around the more distal portions of the nephron tubule, the  **peritubular capillaries** and  **vasa recta**, before returning to the venous system. As the glomerular filtrate progresses through the nephron, these capillary networks recover most of the solutes and water, and return them to the circulation. Since a capillary bed (the glomerulus) drains into a vessel that in turn forms a second capillary bed, the definition of a portal system is met. This is the only portal system in which an arteriole is found between the first and second capillary beds. (Portal systems also link the hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary, and the blood vessels of the digestive viscera to the liver.)


{image:'Figure_26_3_4}
        

## Cortex

In a dissected kidney, it is easy to identify the cortex; it appears lighter in color compared to the rest of the kidney. All of the renal corpuscles as well as both the  **proximal convoluted tubules (PCTs)** and  **distal convoluted tubules** are found here. Some nephrons have a short  **loop of Henle** that does not dip beyond the cortex. These nephrons are called  **cortical nephrons**. About 15 percent of nephrons have long loops of Henle that extend deep into the medulla and are called  **juxtamedullary nephrons**.
