index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-6.2
name: FAQ 6.2
title: FAQ 6.2 - What Happens to Carbon Dioxide After It Is Emitted into the Atmosphere?

Carbon dioxide ({Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}), after it is emitted into the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}, is firstly rapidly distributed between {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}, the upper ocean and vegetation. Subsequently, the carbon continues to be moved between the different reservoirs of the global {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle}, such as soils, the deeper ocean and rocks. Some of these exchanges occur very slowly. Depending on the amount of CO2 released, between 15% and 40% will remain in the atmosphere for up to 2000 years, after which a new balance is established between the atmosphere, the land {Glossary.*Biosphere_terrestrial_and_marine biosphere} and the ocean. Geological processes will take anywhere from tens to hundreds of thousands of years—perhaps longer—to redistribute the carbon further among the geological reservoirs. Higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations, and associated climate impacts of present {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, will, therefore, persist for a very long time into the future.

CO2 is a largely non-reactive gas, which is rapidly mixed throughout the entire {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} in less than a year. Unlike reactive chemical compounds in the atmosphere that are removed and broken down by {Glossary.*Sink sink} processes, such as methane, carbon is instead redistributed among the different reservoirs of the global carbon cycle and ultimately recycled back to the atmosphere on a multitude of time scales. {FAQ_6_2 FAQ 6.2}, {'FAQ_6_2_Figure_1 Figure 1} shows a simplified diagram of the global carbon cycle. The open arrows indicate typical timeframes for carbon atoms to be transferred through the different reservoirs.

{image:'FAQ_6_2_Figure_1}

Before the Industrial Era, the global carbon cycle was roughly balanced. This can be inferred from {Glossary.*Ice_core ice core} measurements, which show a near constant atmospheric concentration of CO2 over the last several thousand years prior to the Industrial Era. {Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} emissions of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, however, have disturbed that equilibrium. As global CO2 concentrations rise, the exchange processes between CO2 and the surface ocean and vegetation are altered, as are subsequent exchanges within and among the carbon reservoirs on land, in the ocean and eventually, the Earth crust. In this way, the added carbon is redistributed by the global carbon cycle, until the exchanges of carbon between the different carbon reservoirs have reached a new, approximate balance.

Over the ocean, CO2 molecules pass through the air-sea interface by gas exchange. In seawater, CO2 interacts with water molecules to form carbonic acid, which reacts very quickly with the large {Glossary.*Reservoir reservoir} of dissolved inorganic carbon—bicarbonate and carbonate ions—in the ocean. Currents and the formation of sinking dense waters transport the carbon between the surface and deeper layers of the ocean. The marine biota also redistribute carbon: marine organisms grow organic tissue and calcareous shells in surface waters, which, after their death, sink to deeper waters, where they are returned to the dissolved inorganic carbon reservoir by dissolution and microbial decomposition. A small fraction reaches the sea floor, and is incorporated into the sediments.

The extra carbon from anthropogenic emissions has the effect of increasing the atmospheric partial pressure of CO2, which in turn increases the air-to-sea exchange of CO2 molecules. In the surface ocean, the carbonate chemistry quickly accommodates that extra CO2. As a result, shallow surface ocean waters reach balance with the atmosphere within 1 or 2 years. Movement of the carbon from the surface into the middle depths and deeper waters takes longer—between decades and many centuries. On still longer time scales, acidification by the invading CO2 dissolves carbonate sediments on the sea floor, which further enhances ocean {Glossary.*Uptake uptake}. However, current understanding suggests that, unless substantial ocean circulation changes occur, {Glossary.*Plankton plankton} growth remains roughly unchanged because it is limited mostly by environmental factors, such as nutrients and light, and not by the availability of inorganic carbon it does not contribute significantly to the ocean uptake of anthropogenic CO2.

On land, vegetation absorbs CO2 by {Glossary.*Photosynthesis photosynthesis} and converts it into organic matter. A fraction of this carbon is immediately returned to the atmosphere as CO2 by plant {Glossary.*Respiration respiration}. Plants use the remainder for growth. Dead plant material is incorporated into soils, eventually to be decomposed by microorganisms and then respired back into the atmosphere as CO2. In addition, carbon in vegetation and soils is also converted back into CO2 by fires, insects, herbivores, as well as by harvest of plants and subsequent consumption by livestock or humans. Some organic carbon is furthermore carried into the ocean by streams and rivers.

An increase in atmospheric CO2 stimulates photosynthesis, and thus carbon uptake. In addition, elevated CO2 concentrations help plants in dry areas to use ground water more efficiently. This in turn increases the {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} in vegetation and soils and so fosters a carbon sink on land. The magnitude of this sink, however, also depends critically on other factors, such as water and nutrient availability.

Coupled carbon-cycle {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} indicate that less carbon is taken up by the ocean and land as the climate warms constituting a positive climate {Glossary.*Feedback feedback}. Many different factors contribute to this effect: warmer seawater, for instance, has a lower CO2 solubility, so altered chemical carbon reactions result in less oceanic uptake of excess atmospheric CO2. On land, higher temperatures foster longer seasonal growth periods in temperate and higher latitudes, but also faster respiration of soil carbon.

The time it takes to reach a new carbon distribution balance depends on the transfer times of carbon through the different reservoirs, and takes place over a multitude of time scales. Carbon is first exchanged among the ‘fast’ carbon reservoirs, such as the atmosphere, surface ocean, land vegetation and soils, over time scales up to a few thousand years. Over longer time scales, very slow secondary geological processes—dissolution of carbonate sediments and sediment burial into the Earth’s crust—become important.

{FAQ_6_2 FAQ 6.2}, {'FAQ_6_2_Figure_2 Figure 2} illustrates the decay of a large excess amount of CO2 (5000 PgC, or about 10 times the cumulative CO2 emitted so far since the beginning of the industrial Era) emitted into the atmosphere, and how it is redistributed among land and the ocean over time. During the first 200 years, the ocean and land take up similar amounts of carbon. On longer time scales, the ocean uptake dominates mainly because of its larger reservoir size (~38,000 PgC) as compared to land (~4000 PgC) and atmosphere (589 PgC prior to the Industrial Era). Because of ocean chemistry the size of the initial input is important: higher emissions imply that a larger fraction of CO2 will remain in the atmosphere. After 2000 years, the atmosphere will still contain between 15% and 40% of those initial CO2 emissions. A further reduction by carbonate sediment dissolution, and reactions with igneous rocks, such as silicate {Glossary.*Weathering weathering} and sediment burial, will take anything from tens to hundreds of thousands of years, or even longer.

{image:'FAQ_6_2_Figure_2}
