index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.5.2.2
title: 6.5.2.2 - Enhanced Carbon Sequestration in the Ocean

The principle here is to enhance the primary productivity of phytoplankton ({Glossary.*Biological_pump biological pump}; {Chapters.6.6_1.6_1_1 Section 6.1.1}) so that a fraction of the extra organic carbon produced gets transported to the deep ocean. Some of the inorganic carbon in the surface ocean that is removed by the export of net primary productivity below the {Glossary.*Surface_layer surface layer} will be subsequently replaced by {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} pumped from the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}, thus removing atmospheric CO2. Ocean primary productivity is limited by nutrients (e.g., iron, nitrogen and phosphorus). Enhanced biological production in ocean {Glossary.*Carbon_Dioxide_Removal CDR} methods ({'Table_6_14 Table 6.14}) is obtained by adding nutrients that would otherwise be limiting ({cite.6.'Martin_1990}). The expected increase in the downward flux of carbon can be partly sequestered as Dissolved Inorganic Carbon (DIC) after {Glossary.*Mineralization_Remineralization mineralization} in the intermediate and deep waters. In other ocean-based CDR methods, algae and kelp farming and burial, carbon would be stored in organic form.

The effectiveness of ocean CDR through iron addition depends on the resulting increase of productivity and the fraction of this extra carbon exported to deep and intermediate waters, and its fate. Small-scale (~10 km2) experiments ({cite.6.'Boyd_et_al_2007}) have shown only limited transient effects of iron addition in removing atmospheric CO2. An increased productivity was indeed observed, but this effect was moderated either by other limiting elements, or by compensatory {Glossary.*Respiration respiration} from increased zooplankton grazing. Most of the carbon produced by primary productivity is oxidized (remineralized into DIC) in the surface layer, so that only a small fraction is exported to the intermediate and deep ocean ({cite.6.'Lampitt_et_al_2008}) although some studies indicate little remineralization in the surface layer ({cite.6.'Jacquet_et_al_2008}). A recent study ({cite.6.'Smetacek_et_al_2012}) finds that at least half the extra carbon in {Glossary.*Plankton plankton} {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} generated by artificial iron addition sank far below a depth of 1000 m, and that a substantial portion is likely to have reached the sea floor. There are some indications that sustained natural iron fertilisation may have a higher efficiency in exporting carbon from surface to intermediate and deep ocean than short term blooms induced by artificial addition of iron ({cite.6.'Buesseler_et_al_2004}; {cite.6.'Blain_et_al_2007}; {cite.6.'Pollard_et_al_2009}). Thus, there is no consensus on the efficiency of iron fertilisation from available field experiments.

Using ocean carbon models (see {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_2.6_3_2_5.6_3_2_5_6 Section 6.3.2.5.6}), the maximum drawdown of atmospheric CO2 have been estimated from 15 ppm ({cite.6.'Zeebe_and_Archer_2005}) to 33 ppm ({cite.6.'Aumont_and_Bopp_2006}) for an idealised continuous (over 100 years) global ocean iron fertilisation, which is technically unrealistic. In other idealised simulations of ocean fertilisation in the global ocean or only in the Southern Ocean ({cite.6.'Joos_et_al_1991}; {cite.6.'Peng_and_Broecker_1991}; {cite.6.'Watson_et_al_1994}; {cite.6.'Cao_and_Caldeira_2010a}), atmospheric CO2 was reduced by less than 100 ppm for ideal conditions. {cite.6.'Jin_and_Gruber_2003 Jin and Gruber (2003)} obtained an atmospheric drawdown of more than 60 ppm over 100 years from an idealised iron fertilisation scenario over the entire Southern Ocean. The radiative benefit from lower CO2 could be offset by a few percent to more than 100% from an increase in {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O} {Topics.*Emissions emissions} ({cite.6.'Jin_and_Gruber_2003}). All the above estimates of maximum potential CO2 removal account for the {Glossary.*Rebound_effect rebound effect} from oceans but not from the land (thus overestimate the atmospheric CO2 reduction).

One ocean CDR variant is to artificially supply more nutrients to the surface ocean in upwelling areas ({cite.6.'Lovelock_and_Rapley_2007}; Karl and Letelier). The amount of carbon sequestered by these enhanced upwelling methods critically depends on their location ({cite.6.'Yool_et_al_2009}). Idealised simulations suggest an atmospheric CO2 removal at a net rate of about 0.9 PgC yr–1 ({cite.6.'Oschlies_et_al_2010b}). This oceanbased CDR method has not been tested in the field, unlike iron addition experiments.
