index: hide
name: Conjugation

In  **conjugation**, DNA is directly transferred from one prokaryote to another by means of a  **conjugation pilus**, which brings the organisms into contact with one another. In  **E. coli**, the genes encoding the ability to conjugate are located on a bacterial  **plasmid** called the  **F plasmid**, also known as the  **fertility factor**, and the conjugation pilus is called the  **F pilus**. The F-plasmid genes encode both the proteins composing the F pilus and those involved in  **rolling circle replication** of the plasmid. Cells containing the F plasmid, capable of forming an F pilus, are called  **F+ cell**s or  **donor cell** **s**, and those lacking an F plasmid are called  **F− cell**s or  **recipient cell** **s**.

## Conjugation of the F Plasmid

During typical conjugation in  *E. coli*, the F pilus of an F<sup>+</sup> cell comes into contact with an F<sup>–</sup> cell and retracts, bringing the two cell envelopes into contact ({'Figure_11_6_Conjug Figure 11.6.Conjug}). Then a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells at the site of the conjugation pilus. As rolling circle replication of the F plasmid occurs in the F<sup>+</sup> cell, a single-stranded copy of the F plasmid is transferred through the cytoplasmic bridge to the F<sup>−</sup> cell, which then synthesizes the complementary strand, making it double stranded. The F<sup>−</sup> cell now becomes an F<sup>+</sup> cell capable of making its own conjugation pilus. Eventually, in a mixed bacterial population containing both F<sup>+</sup> and F<sup>−</sup> cells, all cells will become F<sup>+</sup> cells. Genes on the  *E. coli* F plasmid also encode proteins preventing conjugation between F<sup>+</sup> cells.


{image:'Figure_11_6_Conjug}
        

## Conjugation of F’ and Hfr Cells

Although typical conjugation in  *E. coli* results in the transfer of the F-plasmid DNA only, conjugation may also transfer chromosomal DNA. This is because the F plasmid occasionally integrates into the bacterial chromosome through recombination between the plasmid and the chromosome, forming an  **Hfr cell** ({'Figure_11_6_FtoHfr Figure 11.6.FtoHfr}). “Hfr” refers to the high frequency of recombination seen when recipient F<sup>−</sup> cells receive genetic information from Hfr cells through conjugation. Similar to the imprecise excision of a prophage during  **specialized transduction**, the integrated F plasmid may also be imprecisely excised from the chromosome, producing an  **F’ plasmid** that carries with it some chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site. On conjugation, this DNA is introduced to the recipient cell and may be either maintained as part of the F’ plasmid or be recombined into the recipient cell’s bacterial chromosome.

Hfr cells may also treat the bacterial chromosome like an enormous F plasmid and attempt to transfer a copy of it to a recipient F<sup>−</sup> cell. Because the bacterial chromosome is so large, transfer of the entire chromosome takes a long time ({'Figure_11_6_HFR Figure 11.6.HFR}). However, contact between bacterial cells during conjugation is transient, so it is unusual for the entire chromosome to be transferred. Host chromosomal DNA near the integration site of the F plasmid, displaced by the unidirectional process of rolling circle replication, is more likely to be transferred and recombined into a recipient cell’s chromosome than host genes farther away. Thus, the relative location of bacterial genes on the Hfr cell’s genome can be mapped based on when they are transferred through conjugation. As a result, prior to the age of widespread bacterial genome sequencing, distances on prokaryotic genome maps were often measured in minutes.


{image:'Figure_11_6_FtoHfr}
        


{image:'Figure_11_6_HFR}
        

## Consequences and Applications of Conjugation

Plasmids are an important type of extrachromosomal DNA element in bacteria and, in those cells that harbor them, are considered to be part of the bacterial genome. From a clinical perspective,  **plasmid**s often code for genes involved in virulence. For example, genes encoding proteins that make a bacterial cell resistant to a particular antibiotic are encoded on  **R plasmids**. R plasmids, in addition to their genes for antimicrobial resistance, contain genes that control conjugation and transfer of the plasmid. R plasmids are able to transfer between cells of the same species and between cells of different species. Single R plasmids commonly contain multiple genes conferring resistance to multiple antibiotics.

Genes required for the production of various toxins and molecules important for colonization during infection may also be found encoded on plasmids. For example, verotoxin-producing strains of  **E. coli** ( **VTEC**) appear to have acquired the genes encoding the Shiga toxin from its gram-negative relative  **Shigella dysenteriae** through the acquisition of a large plasmid encoding this toxin. VTEC causes severe diarrheal disease that may result in  **hemolytic uremic syndrome** (HUS), which may be lead to kidney failure and death.

In nonclinical settings, bacterial genes that encode metabolic enzymes needed to degrade specialized atypical compounds like polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are also frequently encoded on plasmids. Additionally, certain plasmids have the ability to move from bacterial cells to other cell types, like those of plants and animals, through mechanisms distinct from conjugation. Such mechanisms and their use in genetic engineering are covered in <link:>.
