index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Horizontal gene transfer** is an important way for asexually reproducing organisms like prokaryotes to acquire new traits.
  * There are three mechanisms of horizontal gene transfer typically used by bacteria:  **transformation**,  **transduction**, and  **conjugation**.
  * Transformation allows for competent cells to take up naked DNA, released from other cells on their death, into their cytoplasm, where it may recombine with the host genome.
  * In  **generalized transduction**, any piece of chromosomal DNA may be transferred by accidental packaging of the degraded host chromosome into a phage head. In  **specialized transduction**, only chromosomal DNA adjacent to the integration site of a lysogenic phage may be transferred as a result of imprecise excision of the prophage.
  * Conjugation is mediated by the  **F plasmid,** which encodes a  **conjugation pilus** that brings an F plasmid-containing  **F+ cell** into contact with an  **F**<sup>-</sup>  **cell**.
  * The rare integration of the F plasmid into the bacterial chromosome, generating an  **Hfr cell**, allows for transfer of chromosomal DNA from the donor to the recipient. Additionally, imprecise excision of the F plasmid from the chromosome may generate an F’ plasmid that may be transferred to a recipient by conjugation.
  * Conjugation transfer of  **R plasmids** is an important mechanism for the spread of antibiotic resistance in bacterial communities.
  *  **Transposons** are molecules of DNA with inverted repeats at their ends that also encode the enzyme transposase, allowing for their movement from one location in DNA to another. Although found in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, transposons are clinically relevant in bacterial pathogens for the movement of virulence factors, including antibiotic resistance genes.
