index: hide
name: Transposition

Genetic elements called  **transposons** (transposable elements), or “ **jumping genes**,” are molecules of DNA that include special inverted repeat sequences at their ends and a gene encoding the enzyme  **transposase** ({'Figure_11_6_Transpos Figure 11.6.Transpos}). Transposons allow the entire sequence to independently excise from one location in a DNA molecule and integrate into the DNA elsewhere through a process called  **transposition**. Transposons were originally discovered in maize (corn) by American geneticist Barbara  **McClintock** (1902–1992) in the 1940s. Transposons have since been found in all types of organisms, both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Thus, unlike the three previous mechanisms discussed, transposition is not prokaryote-specific. Most transposons are nonreplicative, meaning they move in a “cut-and-paste” fashion. Some may be replicative, however, retaining their location in the DNA while making a copy to be inserted elsewhere (“copy and paste”). Because transposons can move within a DNA molecule, from one DNA molecule to another, or even from one cell to another, they have the ability to introduce genetic diversity. Movement within the same DNA molecule can alter phenotype by inactivating or activating a gene.

Transposons may carry with them additional genes, moving these genes from one location to another with them. For example, bacterial transposons can relocate  **antibiotic resistance** genes, moving them from chromosomes to plasmids. This mechanism has been shown to be responsible for the colocalization of multiple antibiotic resistance genes on a single R plasmid in  **Shigella** strains causing bacterial dysentery. Such an R plasmid can then be easily transferred among a bacterial population through the process of conjugation.


{image:'Figure_11_6_Transpos}
        

 summarizes the processes discussed in this section.


****

| Term | Definition |
|:-:|:-:|
| Conjugation | Transfer of DNA through direct contact using a conjugation pilus |
| Transduction | Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria in which genes are transferred through viral infection |
| Transformation | Mechanism of horizontal gene transfer in which naked environmental DNA is taken up by a bacterial cell |
| Transposition | Process whereby DNA independently excises from one location in a DNA molecule and integrates elsewhere |
    
