index: hide
name: Cytophaga, Fusobacterium, and Bacteroides

#  *Cytophaga*,  *Fusobacterium*, and  *Bacteroides*

The gram-negative nonproteobacteria of the genera  **Cytophaga**,  **Fusobacterium**, and  **Bacteroides** are classified together as a phylum and called the  **CFB group**. Although they are phylogenetically diverse, bacteria of the CFB group share some similarities in the sequence of nucleotides in their DNA. They are rod-shaped bacteria adapted to anaerobic environments, such as the tissue of the gums, gut, and rumen of ruminating animals. CFB bacteria are avid fermenters, able to process cellulose in rumen, thus enabling ruminant animals to obtain carbon and energy from grazing.

 *Cytophaga* are motile aquatic bacteria that glide.  *Fusobacteria* inhabit the human mouth and may cause severe infectious diseases. The largest genus of the CFB group is  *Bacteroides*, which includes dozens of species that are prevalent inhabitants of the human large intestine, making up about 30% of the entire gut microbiome ({'Figure_4_3_bacteroide Figure 4.3.bacteroide}). One gram of human feces contains up to 100 billion  *Bacteroides* cells. Most  *Bacteroides* are mutualistic. They benefit from nutrients they find in the gut, and humans benefit from their ability to prevent pathogens from colonizing the large intestine. Indeed, when populations of  *Bacteroides* are reduced in the gut—as often occurs when a patient takes antibiotics—the gut becomes a more favorable environment for pathogenic bacteria and fungi, which can cause secondary infections.


{image:'Figure_4_3_bacteroide}
        

Only a few species of  *Bacteroides* are pathogenic.  *B.* *melaninogenicus*, for example, can cause wound infections in patients with weakened immune systems.
