index: hide
name: Spirochetes

Spirochetes are characterized by their long (up to 250 μm), spiral-shaped bodies. Most  **spirochetes** are also very thin, which makes it difficult to examine gram-stained preparations under a conventional brightfield microscope. Darkfield fluorescent microscopy is typically used instead. Spirochetes are also difficult or even impossible to culture. They are highly motile, using their axial filament to propel themselves. The  **axial filament** is similar to a flagellum, but it wraps around the cell and runs inside the cell body of a spirochete in the periplasmic space between the outer membrane and the plasma membrane ({'Figure_4_3_spirochete Figure 4.3.spirochete}).


{image:'Figure_4_3_spirochete}
        

Several genera of spirochetes include human pathogens. For example, the genus  **Treponema** includes a species  *T. pallidum*, which is further classified into four subspecies:  *T. pallidum pallidum*,  *T. pallidum pertenue, T. pallidum carateum,* and  *T. pallidum endemicum*. The subspecies  *T. pallidum pallidum* causes the sexually transmitted infection known as  **syphilis**, the third most prevalent sexually transmitted bacterial infection in the United States, after chlamydia and gonorrhea. The other subspecies of  *T. pallidum* cause tropical infectious diseases of the skin, bones, and joints.

Another genus of spirochete,  **Borrelia**, contains a number of pathogenic species.  *B. burgdorferi* causes  **Lyme disease**, which is transmitted by several genera of  **ticks** (notably  **Ixodes** and  **Amblyomma**) and often produces a “bull’s eye” rash, fever, fatigue, and, sometimes, debilitating arthritis.  *B. recurrens* causes a condition known as relapsing fever.  lists the genera, species, and related diseases for spirochetes.
