index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Gram-negative nonproteobacteria include the taxa  **spirochetes**; the  *Cytophaga*,  *Fusobacterium*,  *Bacteroides* group; Planctomycetes; and many representatives of  **phototrophic bacteria.**
  * Spirochetes are motile, spiral bacteria with a long, narrow body; they are difficult or impossible to culture.
  * Several genera of spirochetes contain human pathogens that cause such diseases as syphilis and Lyme disease.
  *  *Cytophaga*,  *Fusobacterium*, and  *Bacteroides* are classified together as a phylum called the  **CFB group**. They are rod-shaped anaerobic organoheterotrophs and avid fermenters.  *Cytophaga* are aquatic bacteria with the gliding motility.  *Fusobacteria* inhabit the human mouth and may cause severe infectious diseases.  *Bacteroides* are present in vast numbers in the human gut, most of them being mutualistic but some are pathogenic.
  * Planctomycetes are aquatic bacteria that reproduce by budding; they may form large colonies, and develop a holdfast.
  * Phototrophic bacteria are not a taxon but, rather, a group categorized by their ability to use the energy of sunlight. They include Proteobacteria and nonproteobacteria, as well as sulfur and nonsulfur bacteria colored purple or green.
  * Sulfur bacteria perform anoxygenic photosynthesis, using sulfur compounds as donors of electrons, whereas nonsulfur bacteria use organic compounds (succinate, malate) as donors of electrons.
  * Some phototrophic bacteria are able to fix nitrogen, providing the usable forms of nitrogen to other organisms.
  *  **Cyanobacteria** are oxygen-producing bacteria thought to have played a critical role in the forming of the earth’s atmosphere.
