index: hide
name: Mechanical Equivalent of Heat

It is also possible to change the temperature of a substance by doing work. Work can transfer energy into or out of a system. This realization helped establish the fact that heat is a form of energy. James Prescott Joule (1818–1889) performed many experiments to establish the  **mechanical equivalent of heat**— *the work needed to produce the same effects as heat transfer*. In terms of the units used for these two terms, the best modern value for this equivalence is

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:fo="urn:oasis:names:tc:opendocument:xmlns:xsl-fo-compatible:1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml">                <semantics>                    <mrow>                                                    <mrow>                                <mrow>                                    <mn>1</mn>                                    <mtext>.</mtext>                                    <mtext>000</mtext>                                    <mi/>                                    <mrow><mspace width="0.25em"/>                                        <mtext>kcal</mtext>                                        <mo stretchy="false">=</mo>                                        <mtext>4186</mtext>                                    </mrow>                                    <mi/><mspace width="0.25em"/>                                    <mtext>J</mtext>                                    <mtext>.</mtext>                                </mrow>                            </mrow>                                                <mrow/>                    </mrow>                    <annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;1 &quot;.&quot; &quot;000&quot;`&quot;kcal&quot;=&quot;4186&quot;`J &quot;.&quot; &#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation>                </semantics>            </math>         

We consider this equation as the conversion between two different units of energy.


{image:'Figure_15_1_2a}
        

The figure above shows one of Joule’s most famous experimental setups for demonstrating the mechanical equivalent of heat. It demonstrated that work and heat can produce the same effects, and helped establish the principle of conservation of energy. Gravitational potential energy (PE) (work done by the gravitational force) is converted into kinetic energy (KE), and then randomized by viscosity and turbulence into increased average kinetic energy of atoms and molecules in the system, producing a temperature increase. His contributions to the field of thermodynamics were so significant that the SI unit of energy was named after him.

Heat added or removed from a system changes its internal energy and thus its temperature. Such a temperature increase is observed while cooking. However, adding heat does not necessarily increase the temperature. An example is melting of ice; that is, when a substance changes from one phase to another. Work done on the system or by the system can also change the internal energy of the system. Joule demonstrated that the temperature of a system can be increased by stirring. If an ice cube is rubbed against a rough surface, work is done by the frictional force. A system has a well-defined internal energy, but we cannot say that it has a certain “heat content” or “work content”. We use the phrase “heat transfer” to emphasize its nature.
