index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.5.3
title: 13.5.3 - Confidence in Likely Ranges and Bounds

The {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({cite.13.'Meehl_et_al_2007}) presented process-model-based {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of GMSL rise for the end of the 21st century, but did not provide a best estimate or likely range principally because scientific understanding at the time was not sufficient to allow an assessment of the possibility of future rapid changes in ice-sheet dynamics (on time scales of a few decades, {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_5 Section 4.4.5}). Future rapid changes in icesheet outflow were consequently not included in the ranges given by the AR4. For the SRES A1B scenario, the AR4 range was 0.21 to 0.48 m, and for the highest {Topics.*Scenarios emissions scenario}, A1FI, it was 0.26 to 0.59 m. The AR4 also noted that if ice-sheet outflow increased linearly with global mean surface air temperature, the AR4 maximum projections would be raised by 0.1 to 0.2 m. The AR4 was unable to exclude larger values or to assess their {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood}.

Since the publication of the AR4, upper bounds of up to 2.4 m for GMSL rise by 2100 have been estimated by other approaches, namely SEMs ({Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_2 Section 13.5.2}), evidence from {Topics.*Past_Climate past climates} ({Chapters.13.13_2.13_2_1 Section 13.2.1}) and physical constraints on ice-sheet dynamics (Sections {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 13.4.3.2} and {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 13.4.4.2}). The broad range of values reflects the different methodologies for obtaining the upper bound, involving different constraining factors and sources of evidence. In particular, the upper bound is strongly affected by the choice of probability level, which in some approaches is unknown because the probability of the underlying assumptions is not quantified ({cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013b}).

The confidence that can be placed in projections of GMSL rise and its upper bound by the various approaches must be considered. Confidence arises from the nature, quantity, quality and consistency of the evidence.

The first approach is based on process-based projections, which use the results from several models for each contribution (Sections {Chapters.13.13_4 13.4} and {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_1 13.5.1}; {'Table_13_5 Table 13.5}). There is medium evidence in support of this approach, arising from our understanding of the modelled physical processes, the consistency of the models with wider physical understanding of those processes as elements of the climate system (e.g., {Box_13_1 Box 13.1}), the consistency of modelled and observed contributions ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_1 Section 13.3.1} to 13.3.5), the consistency of observed and modelled GMSL ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_6 Section 13.3.6}), and the consistency of process-based projections based on the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs}, which have a range of 50 to 60% of the ensemble mean under a given scenario ({'Table_13_5 Table 13.5}). Considering this evidence, we have medium confidence in the process-based projections.

The second approach uses SEMs ({Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_2 Section 13.5.2}, {'Table_13_6 Table 13.6}), which make projections by calibrating a physically motivated relationship between GMSL and some other parameter of the climate system in the past and applying it to the future, without quantifying the contributory physical processes. If we had no physical understanding of the causes of sea level rise, the semi-empirical approach to projections would be the only possible one, but extrapolation beyond the range of calibration implies uncertainty that is difficult to quantify, owing to the assumption that {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} in the future will have the same relationship as it has had in the past to RF or global mean temperature change ({Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_2 Section 13.5.2}). As a result, there is low agreement and no consensus in the scientific community about the reliability of SEM projections, despite their successful calibration and evaluation against the observed 20th century sea level record.

For a given RCP, some SEMs project a range that overlaps the processbased likely range while others project a median and 95-percentile that are about twice as large as the process-based models. In nearly every case, the SEM 95-percentile is above the process-based likely range ({'Figure_13_12 Figure 13.12}). Two physical explanations have been suggested for the higher projections. First, the contribution from accelerated {Glossary.*Calving calving} of tidewater glaciers may be substantial and included in SEMs but not process-based models ({cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2012b}); however, this could account for only 0.1 to 0.2 m of additional GMSL rise. Second, SEMs may allow for rapid ice-sheet dynamical change ({Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_4 Section 4.4.4}) in response to future climate change ({cite.13.'Grinsted_et_al_2010}; {cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013a}). In order for large ice-sheet dynamical changes to be predictable by SEMs, two conditions must be met. First, these changes must have contributed substantially to sea level rise during the period of calibration. This is very unlikely to be the case, because it is very likely that dynamical changes have contributed only a small part of the observed sea level rise during the 20th century, rising to about 15% during 1993–2010 ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_6 Section 13.3.6}). Second, the changes must have a link to global {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} or RF. Current understanding of recent dynamical changes in Greenland and Antarctica is that they have been triggered by local changes in ocean temperature ({cite.13.'Holland_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Thoma_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Jacobs_et_al_2011}), but a link has not been demonstrated between these changes and global climate change or its drivers. Consequently there is great uncertainty regarding whether recent ice-sheet dynamical changes indicate a long-term {Glossary.*Trend trend} or instead arise from {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} ({cite.13.'Bamber_and_Aspinall_2013}). Hence there is no evidence that ice-sheet dynamical change is the explanation for the higher GMSL rise projections of SEMs, implying that either there is some other contribution which is presently unidentified or underestimated by process-based models, or that the projections of SEMs are overestimates (cf. {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_2 Section 13.5.2}). Because of the limited or medium evidence supporting SEMs, and the low agreement about their reliability, we have low confidence in their projections.

The third approach uses paleo records of {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} that show that rapid GMSL rise has occurred during glacial terminations, at rates that averaged about 10 mm yr–1 over centuries, with at least one instance (Meltwater Pulse 1A) that exceeded 40 mm yr–1 ({Chapters.5.5_6.5_6_3 Section 5.6.3}), but this rise was primarily from much larger ice-sheet sources that no longer exist. Contributions from these vanished ice sheets could have continued even after sea level and climate had reached interglacial states, if the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets contracted during the termination to smaller sizes than at present. During past interglacial periods, only the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets were present. For the time interval during the {Glossary.*Last_Interglacial LIG} in which GMSL was above present, there is high confidence that the maximum 1000-year average rate of GMSL rise during these periods exceeded 2 m kyr–1 but did not exceed 7 m kyr–1 ({cite.13.'Kopp_et_al_2013}) (Sections {Chapters.5.5_6.5_6_2 5.6.2} and {Chapters.13.13_2.13_2_1.13_2_1_3 13.2.1.3}). Because climate variations during interglacial periods had different {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} from {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} climate change, they give only a limited basis for {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} of the future, and we do not consider that they provide upper bounds for GMSL rise during the 21st century.

The fourth approach is concerned particularly with the contribution from ice-sheet dynamical change, for which it considers kinematic limits. {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)} argued that scenarios of GMSL rise exceeding 2 m by 2100 are physically untenable, ruling out, for example, the heuristic argument of {cite.13.'Hansen_et_al_2007 Hansen et al. (2007)} giving 5 m by 2100. {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)} constructed scenarios of 0.8 m and 2.0 m, and {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011 Katsman et al. (2011)} of 1.15 m, for GMSL rise by 2100, including ice-sheet rapid dynamical acceleration. Although these authors considered their scenarios to be physically possible, they are unable to quantify their likelihood, because the probability of the assumptions on which they depend cannot be estimated from observations of the response of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets to climate change or variability on century time scales. These scenarios involve contributions of ~0.5 m from Antarctica. This is much greater than any process-based projections of dynamical ice-sheet change ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 Section 13.4.4.2}), and would require either a sustained high increase in outflow in all marine-based sectors or the localized collapse of the {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} in the Amundsen Sea sector ({cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013a}).

In summary, we have greater confidence in the process-based projections than in the other approaches, and our assessment is that GMSL rise during the 21st century for each RCP scenario is likely (medium confidence) to lie within the 5 to 95% range given by the processbased projections ({Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_1 Section 13.5.1} and {'Table_13_5 Table 13.5}; see {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_4 Section 13.5.4} for following centuries), which are consistent with the likely ranges projected for global mean surface air temperature change ({Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_1.12_4_1_2 Section 12.4.1.2}). We are not able to assess a very likely range on the same basis, because there is no assessment available of the very likely range for global mean SAT change, and because we cannot robustly quantify the probability of ice-sheet dynamical changes which would give rise to greater values.

Under the {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} scenario, which has the highest RF, the likely range reaches 0.98 m by 2100 relative to 1986–2005. Observations do not show an increase in Antarctic precipitation, which is projected by models and makes a negative contribution to the projected GMSL rise ({'Table_13_5 Table 13.5}). The recovery of Antarctic stratospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} concentration and increased basal melting of Antarctic ice shelves have both been suggested as giving rise to mechanisms whereby the Antarctic warming and precipitation increase might be suppressed with respect to CMIP5 projections ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_1 Section 13.4.4.1}). If the Antarctic precipitation increase is omitted from the process-based projections, the likely range for RCP8.5 at 2100 reaches 1.03 m (assuming uncorrelated errors). Higher values for 2100 are given in the scientific literature on the basis of various approaches: 1.15 m ({cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011}), 1.21 m ({cite.13.'Schaeffer_et_al_2012}) (for RCP4.5), 1.40 m (National Research Council, 2012), 1.65 m ({cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2012b}) (for RCP8.5), 1.79 m ({cite.13.'Vermeer_and_Rahmstorf_2009}) (for SRES A1FI), 1.90 m ({cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b}) (with {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} calibration, for RCP8.5), 2.0 m ({cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008}), 2.25 m ({cite.13.'Sriver_et_al_2012}), and 2.4 m ({cite.13.'Nicholls_et_al_2011}). Considering this inconsistent evidence, we conclude that the probability of specific levels above the likely range cannot be reliably evaluated.

Only the collapse of marine-based sectors of the Antarctic ice sheet could cause GMSL rise substantially above the likely range during the 21st century. Expert estimates of contributions from this {Glossary.*Source source} have a wide spread ({cite.13.'Bamber_and_Aspinall_2013}), indicating a lack of consensus on the probability for such a collapse. The potential additional contribution to GMSL rise also cannot be precisely quantified, but there is medium confidence that, if a collapse were initiated, it would not exceed several tenths of a metre during the 21st century ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 Section 13.4.4.2}).

The time mean rate of GMSL rise during the 21st century is very likely to exceed the rate of 2.0 [1.7 to 2.3] mm yr–1 observed during 1971–2010, because the process-based GMSL projections indicate a significantly greater rate even under the {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} scenario, which has the lowest RF. It has been asserted that the acceleration of GMSL rise implied by the IPCC AR4 projections is inconsistent with the observed magnitude of acceleration during the 20th century ({cite.13.'Boretti_2011}, 2012b, 2012a, 2012c, 2013a, 2013b. 2013c; {cite.13.'Boretti_and_Watson_2012}; {cite.13.'Parker_2013a}, 2013b, 2013c). Refuting this argument, {cite.13.'Hunter_and_Brown_2013 Hunter and Brown (2013)} show that the acceleration projected in the AR4 is consistent with observations since 1990s. Present understanding of the contributions to GMSL rise ({Chapters.13.13_3 Section 13.3}) gives an explanation of the rate of 20th century GMSL rise and confidence in the process-based projections, which indicate a greater rate of rise in the 21st century because of increasing forcing.

The improved agreement of process-based models with observations and physical understanding represents progress since the AR4, in which there was insufficient confidence to give likely ranges for 21st century GMSL rise, as we have done here. For scenario SRES A1B, which was assessed in the AR4, the likely range on the basis of science assessed in the AR5 is 0.60 [0.42 to 0.80] m by 2100 relative to 1986–2005, and 0.57 [0.40 to 0.76] m by 2090–2099 relative to 1990. Compared with the AR4 {Glossary.*Projection projection} of 0.21 to 0.48 m for the same scenario and period, the largest increase is from the inclusion of rapid changes in Greenland and Antarctic ice sheet outflow, for which the combined likely range is 0.03 to 0.21 m by 2091–2100 (assuming uncorrelated {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}). These terms were omitted in the AR4 because a basis to make projections was not available in published literature at that time. The contribution from {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion thermal expansion} is similar to the AR4 projection and has smaller uncertainty. The contribution from glaciers is larger than in the AR4 primarily because of the greater estimate of the present {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} volume in new inventories (although the glacier area estimate is similar, {'Table_4_1 Table 4.1}), and the Greenland SMB contribution is larger because of recent improvement in models of relevant surface processes. Further progress on modelling each of the contributions is still needed in order to attain high confidence in GMSL projections, in particular concerning the probability distribution of GMSL above the likely ranges.
