index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.8.1
title: 12.4.8.1 - Carbon Dioxide

As presented in {Chapters.12.12_3 Section 12.3}, the CMIP5 experimental design includes, for the {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} scenario, experiments driven either by prescribed {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} {Topics.*Emissions emissions} or concentration. The historical and 21st century emission-driven simulations allow evaluating the {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} of the {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system} when atmospheric CO2 and the climate response are interactively being calculated by the {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs}. In such ESMs, the atmospheric CO2 is calculated as the difference between the imposed anthropogenic emissions and the sum of land and ocean carbon uptakes. As most of these ESMs account for land use changes and their CO2 emissions, the only {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} is fossil fuel CO2 emissions (along with all non-CO2 forcings as in the C-driven RCP8.5 simulations). For a given ESM, the emission driven and concentration driven simulations would show different climate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} if the simulated atmospheric CO2 in the emission driven run is significantly different from the one prescribed for the concentration driven runs. This would happen if the ESMs {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} is different from the one simulated by MAGICC6, the model used to calculate the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} concentrations from the emissions for the four {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} (Meinshausen et al., 2011c). When driven by CO2 concentration, the ESMs can calculate the fossil fuel CO2 emissions that would be compatible with the prescribed atmospheric CO2 trajectory, allowing comparison with the set of CO2 emissions initially estimated by the IAMs ({cite.12.'Arora_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Jones_et_al_2013}) (see {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_3 Section 6.4.3}, {Box_6_4 Box 6.4}).

{'Figure_12_36 Figure 12.36} shows the simulated atmospheric CO2 and global average surface air temperature warming (relative to the 1986–2005 reference period) for the RCP8.5 emission driven simulations from the CMIP5 ESMs, compared to the concentration driven simulations from the same models. Most (seven out of eleven) of the models estimate a larger CO2 concentration than the prescribed one. By 2100, the multimodel average CO2 concentration is 985 ± 97 ppm (full range 794 to 1142 ppm), while the CO2 concentration prescribed for the RCP8.5 is 936 ppm. {'Figure_12_36 Figure 12.36} also shows the range of atmospheric CO2 projections when the MAGICC6 model, used to provide the RCP concentrations, is tuned to emulate combinations of {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} uncertainty taken from 19 CMIP3 models and carbon cycle feedbacks uncertainty taken from 10 C4MIP models, generating 190 model simulations (Meinshausen et al., 2011c; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011b}). The emulation of the CMIP3/C4MIP models shows for the RCP8.5, a range of simulated CO2 concentrations of 794 to 1149 ppm (90% confidence level), extremely similar to what is obtained with the CMIP5 ESMs, with atmospheric concentration as high as 1150 ppm by 2100, that is, more than 200 ppm above the prescribed CO2 concentration.

{image:'Figure_12_36}

Global warming simulated by the E-driven runs show higher upper ends than when atmospheric CO2 concentration is prescribed. For the models assessed here, the global {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} change (2081– 2100 average relative to 1986–2005 average) ranges between 2.6°C and 4.7°C, with a multi-model average of 3.7°C ± 0.7°C for the concentration driven simulations, while the emission driven simulations give a range of 2.5°C to 5.6°C, with a multi-model average of 3.9°C ± 0.9°C, that is, 5% larger than for the concentration driven runs. The models that simulate the largest CO2 concentration by 2100 have the largest warming amplification in the emission driven simulations, with an additional warming of more than 0.5°C.

The uncertainty on the carbon cycle has been shown to be of comparable magnitude to the uncertainty arising from physical climate processes ({cite.12.'Gregory_et_al_2009}). {cite.12.'Huntingford_et_al_2009 Huntingford et al. (2009)} used a simple model to characterize the relative role of carbon cycle and climate sensitivity {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in contributing to the range of future temperature changes, concluding that the range of carbon cycle processes represent about 40% of the physical feedbacks. Perturbed parameter ensembles systematically explore land carbon cycle parameter uncertainty and illustrate that a wide range of carbon cycle responses are consistent with the same underlying model structures and plausible parameter ranges ({cite.12.'Booth_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Lambert_et_al_2012}). {'Figure_12_37 Figure 12.37} shows how the comparable range of future climate change (SRES A1B) arises from parametric uncertainty in land carbon cycle and atmospheric feedbacks. The same {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} shows that the range of atmospheric CO2 in the land carbon cycle ensemble is wider than the full SRES concentration range (B1 to A1FI scenario).

{image:'Figure_12_37}

The CMIP5 ESMs described above do not include the positive {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} arising from the carbon release from high latitudes {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost} thawing under a warming scenario, which could further increase the atmospheric CO2 concentration and the warming. Two recent studies investigated the climate–permafrost feedback from simulations with models of intermediate complexity ({Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs}) that accounts for a permafrost carbon module ({cite.12.'MacDougall_et_al_2012}; Schneider von Deimling et al., 2012). {cite.12.'Burke_et_al_2012 Burke et al. (2012)} also estimated carbon loss from permafrost, from a diagnostic of the present-day permafrost carbon store and future soil warming as simulated by CMIP5 models. However, this last study did not quantify the effect on global temperature. Each of these studies found that the range of additional warming due to the permafrost carbon loss is quite large, because of uncertainties in future high latitude soil warming, amount of carbon stored in permafrost soils, vulnerability of freshly thawed organic material, the proportion of soil carbon that might be emitted as carbon dioxide via aerobic decomposition or as methane via anaerobic decomposition (Schneider von Deimling et al., 2012). For the RCP8.5, the additional warming from permafrost ranges between 0.04°C and 0.69°C by 2100 although there is medium confidence in these numbers as are the ones on the amount of carbon released (see {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_5.12_5_5_4 Section 12.5.5.4}) ({cite.12.'MacDougall_et_al_2012}; Schneider von Deimling et al., 2012).
