index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.5.3
title: 4.5.3 - Trends from In Situ Measurements

{cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} stimulated a review paper ({cite.4.'Brown_and_Mote_2009}) that synthesized modelling results as well as observations from many countries. They showed that decreases in various metrics of snow are most likely to be observed in spring and at locations where air temperatures are close to the freezing point, because changes in air temperature there are most effective at reducing snow {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation}, increasing snowmelt, or both. However, unravelling the competing effects of rising temperatures and changing precipitation remains an important challenge in understanding and interpreting observed changes. {'Figure_4_21 Figure 4.21} shows a compilation of many published trends observed at individual locations; data were obtained either from tables in the published papers, or (when the numerical results in the figures were not tabulated) directly from the author, in some cases including updates to the published data sets. The figure shows that in most studies, a majority of sites experienced declines during the varying periods of record, and where data on site mean temperature or elevation were available, warmer/lower sites (red circles) were more likely to experience declines.

{image:'Figure_4_21}

Some in situ studies in addition to those in {'Figure_4_21 Figure 4.21} deserve discussion. {cite.4.'Ma_and_Qin_2012 Ma and Qin (2012)} described trends by season at 754 stations aggregated by {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} in China over 1951–2009; they found statistically significant trends: positive in winter SD in northwest China, and negative in SD and {Glossary.*Snow_water_equivalent SWE} in spring for China as a whole and spring SWE for the Qinghai-Xizang (Tibet) Plateau. {cite.4.'Marty_and_Meister_2012 Marty and Meister (2012)} noted changes at six high-elevation (>2200 m) sites in the European Alps of Switzerland, Austria, and Germany, consistent with {'Figure_4_21 Figure 4.21}: no change in SD in midwinter, shortening of SCD in spring and reduction in spring SWE and SD coincident with warming. For the Pyrenees, Lopez-Moreno and Vicente-Serrano (2007) derived {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} SD for 106 sites since 1950 from actual SD measurements since 1985 and weather measurements; they noted declines in spring SD that were related to changes in atmospheric circulation. In the SH, of seven records in the Andes, none have significant trends in maximum SWE ({cite.4.'Masiokas_et_al_2010}) over their periods of record. Of four records in Australia discussed in AR4, all show decreases in spring SWE over their respective periods of record ({cite.4.'Nicholls_2005}), and the only one that has been updated since the {cite.4.'Nicholls_2005 Nicholls (2005)} paper shows a statistically significant decrease of 37% (Sanchez-Bayo and Green, 2013).
