index: hide
name: Accuracy and Precision

Scientists typically make repeated measurements of a quantity to ensure the quality of their findings and to know both the  **precision** and the  **accuracy** of their results. Measurements are said to be precise if they yield very similar results when repeated in the same manner. A measurement is considered accurate if it yields a result that is very close to the true or accepted value. Precise values agree with each other; accurate values agree with a true value. These characterizations can be extended to other contexts, such as the results of an archery competition ({'CNX_Chem_1_5_Archery CNX.Chem.1.5.Archery}).


{image:'CNX_Chem_1_5_Archery}
        

Suppose a quality control chemist at a pharmaceutical company is tasked with checking the accuracy and precision of three different machines that are meant to dispense 10 ounces (296 mL) of cough syrup into storage bottles. She proceeds to use each machine to fill five bottles and then carefully determines the actual volume dispensed, obtaining the results tabulated in .


****

| Dispenser #1 | Dispenser #2 | Dispenser #3 |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 283.3 | 298.3 | 296.1 |
| 284.1 | 294.2 | 295.9 |
| 283.9 | 296.0 | 296.1 |
| 284.0 | 297.8 | 296.0 |
| 284.1 | 293.9 | 296.1 |
    

Considering these results, she will report that dispenser #1 is precise (values all close to one another, within a few tenths of a milliliter) but not accurate (none of the values are close to the target value of 296 mL, each being more than 10 mL too low). Results for dispenser #2 represent improved accuracy (each volume is less than 3 mL away from 296 mL) but worse precision (volumes vary by more than 4 mL). Finally, she can report that dispenser #3 is working well, dispensing cough syrup both accurately (all volumes within 0.1 mL of the target volume) and precisely (volumes differing from each other by no more than 0.2 mL).
