index: hide
name: Ionic Compounds

When an element composed of atoms that readily lose electrons (a metal) reacts with an element composed of atoms that readily gain electrons (a nonmetal), a transfer of electrons usually occurs, producing ions. The compound formed by this transfer is stabilized by the electrostatic attractions (ionic bonds) between the ions of opposite charge present in the compound. For example, when each sodium atom in a sample of sodium metal (group 1) gives up one electron to form a sodium cation, Na<sup>+</sup>, and each chlorine atom in a sample of chlorine gas (group 17) accepts one electron to form a chloride anion, Cl<sup>−</sup>, the resulting compound, NaCl, is composed of sodium ions and chloride ions in the ratio of one Na<sup>+</sup> ion for each Cl<sup>−</sup> ion. Similarly, each calcium atom (group 2) can give up two electrons and transfer one to each of two chlorine atoms to form CaCl<sub>2</sub>, which is composed of Ca<sup>2+</sup> and Cl<sup>−</sup> ions in the ratio of one Ca<sup>2+</sup> ion to two Cl<sup>−</sup> ions.

A compound that contains ions and is held together by ionic bonds is called an  **ionic compound**. The periodic table can help us recognize many of the compounds that are ionic: When a metal is combined with one or more nonmetals, the compound is usually ionic. This guideline works well for predicting ionic compound formation for most of the compounds typically encountered in an introductory chemistry course. However, it is not always true (for example, aluminum chloride, AlCl<sub>3</sub>, is not ionic).

You can often recognize ionic compounds because of their properties. Ionic compounds are solids that typically melt at high temperatures and boil at even higher temperatures. For example, sodium chloride melts at 801 °C and boils at 1413 °C. (As a comparison, the molecular compound water melts at 0 °C and boils at 100 °C.) In solid form, an ionic compound is not electrically conductive because its ions are unable to flow (“electricity” is the flow of charged particles). When molten, however, it can conduct electricity because its ions are able to move freely through the liquid ({'Figure_2_6_NaClMolten Figure 2.6.NaClMolten}).


{image:'Figure_2_6_NaClMolten}
        
