index: hide
public: ar5-Box-10.1
name: Box 10.1
title: Box 10.1 - How Attribution Studies Work

This box presents an idealized demonstration of the concepts underlying most current approaches to {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution detection} and attribution of climate change and how these relate to conventional linear regression. The coloured dots in {Box_10_1 Box 10.1}a, Figure 1 show observed annual {Topics.*Surface_Temperature GMST} from 1861 to 2012, with warmer years coloured red and colder years coloured blue. Observations alone indicate, unequivocally, that the Earth has warmed, but to quantify how different external factors have contributed to this warming, studies must compare such observations with the expected responses to these external factors. The orange line shows an estimate of the GMST response to {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} (GHG and {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol}) forcing obtained from the mean of the CMIP3 and CMIP5 ensembles, while the blue line shows the CMIP3/CMIP5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} mean response to natural (solar and volcanic) forcing.

{image:'Box_10_1_Figure_1}

In statistical terms, attribution involves finding the combination of these anthropogenic and natural responses that best fits these observations: this is shown by the black line in panel (a). To show how this fit is obtained in non-technical terms, the data are plotted against model-simulated anthropogenic warming, instead of time, in panel (b). There is a strong correlation between observed temperatures and model-simulated anthropogenic warming, but because of the presence of natural factors and internal {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability}, correlation alone is not enough for attribution.

To quantify how much of the observed warming is attributable to {Topics.*Human_Influence human influence}, panel (c) shows observed temperatures plotted against the model-simulated response to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings} in one direction and natural forcings in the other. Observed temperatures increase with both natural and anthropogenic model-simulated warming: the warmest years are in the far corner of the box. A flat surface through these points (here obtained by an ordinary least-squares fit), indicated by the coloured mesh, slopes up away from the viewer.

The orientation of this surface indicates how model-simulated responses to natural and anthropogenic forcing need to be scaled to reproduce the observations. The best-fit gradient in the direction of anthropogenic warming (visible on the rear left face of the box) is 0.9, indicating the CMIP3/CMIP5 ensemble average overestimates the magnitude of the observed response to anthropogenic forcing by about 10%. The best-fit gradient in the direction of natural changes (visible on the rear right face) is 0.7, indicating that the observed response to natural forcing is 70% of the average model-simulated response. The black line shows the points on this flat surface that are directly above or below the observations: each ‘pin’ corresponds to a different year. When re-plotted against time, indicated by the years on the rear left face of the box, this black line gives the black line previously seen in panel (a). The length of the pins indicates ‘residual’ temperature fluctuations due to internal variability.

The timing of these residual temperature fluctuations is unpredictable, representing an inescapable {Glossary.*Source source} of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty}. We can quantify this uncertainty by asking how the gradients of the best-fit surface might vary if El Niño events, for example, had occurred in different years in the observed temperature record. To do this, we repeat the analysis in panel (c), replacing observed temperatures with samples of simulated internal climate variability from control runs of coupled {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}. Grey diamonds in panel (d) show the results: these gradients cluster around zero, because control runs have no anthropogenic or natural forcing, but there is still some scatter. Assuming that internal variability in global temperature simply adds to the response to {Glossary.*External_forcing external forcing}, this scatter provides an estimate of uncertainty in the gradients, or scaling factors, required to reproduce the observations, shown by the red cross and ellipse.

The red cross and ellipse are clearly separated from the origin, which means that the slope of the best-fit surface through the observations cannot be accounted for by internal variability: some climate change is detected in these observations. Moreover, it is also separated from both the vertical and horizontal axes, which means that the responses to both anthropogenic and natural factors are individually detectable.

The magnitude of observed temperature change is consistent with the CMIP3/CMIP5 ensemble average response to anthropogenic forcing (uncertainty in this scaling factor spans unity) but is significantly lower than the model-average response to natural forcing (this 5 to 95% confidence interval excludes unity). There are, however, reasons why these models may be underestimating the response to volcanic forcing (e.g., Driscoll et al, 2012), so this discrepancy does not preclude detection and attribution of both anthropogenic and natural influence, as simulated by the CMIP3/CMIP5 ensemble average, in the observed GMST record.

The top axis in panel (d) indicates the attributable anthropogenic warming over 1951–2010, estimated from the anthropogenic warming in the CMIP3/CMIP5 ensemble average, or the gradient of the orange line in panel (a) over this period. Because the model-simulated responses have been scaled to fit the observations, the attributable anthropogenic warming in this example is 0.6°C to 0.9°C and does not depend on the magnitude of the raw model-simulated changes. Hence an attribution statement based on such an analysis, such as ‘most of the warming over the past 50 years is attributable to anthropogenic drivers’, depends only on the shape, or time history, not the size, of the model-simulated warming, and hence does not depend on the models’ sensitivity to rising GHG levels.

Formal attribution studies like this example provide objective estimates of how much recent warming is attributable to human influence. Attribution is not, however, a purely statistical exercise. It also requires an assessment that there are no confounding factors that could have caused a large part of the ‘{Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed}’ change. Statistical tests can be used to check that observed residual temperature fluctuations (the lengths and clustering of the pins in panel (c)) are consistent with internal variability expected from coupled models, but ultimately these tests must complement physical arguments that the combination of responses to anthropogenic and natural forcing is the only available consistent explanation of recent observed temperature change.

This demonstration assumes, for visualization purposes, that there are only two candidate contributors to the observed warming, anthropogenic and natural, and that only GMST is available. More complex attribution problems can be undertaken using the same principles, such as aiming to separate the response to {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} from other anthropogenic factors by also including spatial information. These require, in effect, an extension of panel (c), with additional dimensions corresponding to additional causal factors, and additional points corresponding to temperatures in different regions.
