index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-10.2
name: FAQ 10.2
title: FAQ 10.2 - When Will Human Influences on Climate Become Obvious on Local Scales?

Human-caused warming is already becoming locally obvious on land in some tropical regions, especially during the warm part of the year. Warming should become obvious in middle latitudes—during summer at first—within the next several decades. The {Glossary.*Trend trend} is expected to emerge more slowly there, especially during winter, because natural {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} increases with distance from the equator and during the cold season. Temperature trends already detected in many regions have been {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to {Topics.*Human_Influence human influence}. Temperature-sensitive climate variables, such as Arctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}, also show detected trends attributable to human influence.

Warming trends associated with global change are generally more evident in averages of global temperature than in time series of local temperature (‘local’ here refers generally to individual locations, or small regional averages). This is because most of the local variability of local climate is averaged away in the global mean. Multi-decadal warming trends detected in many regions are considered to be outside the range of trends one might expect from natural internal variability of the climate system, but such trends will only become obvious when the local mean climate emerges from the ‘noise’ of year-to-year variability. How quickly this happens depends on both the rate of the warming trend and the amount of local variability. Future warming trends cannot be {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} precisely, especially at local scales, so estimates of the future time of emergence of a warming trend cannot be made with precision.

In some tropical regions, the warming trend has already emerged from local variability ({FAQ_10_2 FAQ 10.2}, {'FAQ_10_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}). This happens more quickly in the tropics because there is less temperature variability there than in other parts of the globe. Projected warming may not emerge in middle latitudes until the mid-21st century—even though warming trends there are larger—because local temperature variability is substantially greater there than in the tropics. On a seasonal basis, local temperature variability tends to be smaller in summer than in winter. Warming therefore tends to emerge first in the warm part of the year, even in regions where the warming trend is larger in winter, such as in central Eurasia in {FAQ_10_2 FAQ 10.2}, {'FAQ_10_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}.

{image:'FAQ_10_2_Figure_1}

Variables other than land {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}, including some oceanic regions, also show rates of long-term change different from natural variability. For example, Arctic sea ice extent is declining very rapidly, and already shows a human influence. On the other hand, local precipitation trends are very hard to detect because at most locations the variability in precipitation is quite large. The probability of record-setting warm summer temperatures has increased throughout much of the Northern Hemisphere . High temperatures presently considered extreme are projected to become closer to the norm over the coming decades. The probabilities of other extreme events, including some cold spells, have lessened.

In the present climate, individual {Topics.*Extreme_Events extreme weather} events cannot be unambiguously ascribed to climate change, since such events could have happened in an unchanged climate. However the probability of occurrence of such events could have changed significantly at a particular location. Human-induced increases in greenhouse gases are estimated to have contributed substantially to the probability of some heatwaves. Similarly, {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} studies suggest that increased greenhouse gases have contributed to the observed intensification of heavy precipitation events found over parts of the Northern Hemisphere. However, the probability of many other extreme weather events may not have changed substantially. Therefore, it is incorrect to ascribe every new weather record to climate change.

The date of future emergence of projected warming trends also depends on local climate variability, which can temporarily increase or decrease temperatures. Furthermore, the projected local temperature curves shown in {FAQ_10_2 FAQ 10.2}, {'FAQ_10_2_Figure_1 Figure 1} are based on multiple climate model simulations forced by the same assumed future {Topics.*Emissions emissions} scenario. A different rate of atmospheric {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} would cause a different warming trend, so the spread of model warming {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} (the coloured shading in {FAQ_10_2 FAQ 10.2}, {'FAQ_10_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}) would be wider if the figure included a spread of greenhouse gas {Topics.*Scenarios emissions scenarios}. The increase required for summer temperature change to emerge from 20th century local variability (regardless of the rate of change) is depicted on the central map in {FAQ_10_2 FAQ 10.2}, {'FAQ_10_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}.

A full answer to the question of when human influence on local climate will become obvious depends on the strength of evidence one considers sufficient to render something ‘obvious’. The most convincing scientific evidence for the effect of climate change on local scales comes from analysing the global picture, and from the wealth of evidence from across the climate system linking many observed changes to human influence.
