index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-10.1
name: FAQ 10.1
title: FAQ 10.1 - Climate Is Always Changing. How Do We Determine the Causes of Observed Changes?

The causes of observed long-term changes in climate (on time scales longer than a decade) are assessed by determining whether the expected ‘fingerprints’ of different causes of climate change are present in the historical record. These fingerprints are derived from computer model simulations of the different patterns of climate change caused by individual climate {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}. On multi-decade time scales, these forcings include processes such as {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} increases or changes in solar brightness. By comparing the simulated {Glossary.*Fingerprint fingerprint} patterns with observed climate changes, we can determine whether observed changes are best explained by those fingerprint patterns, or by natural variability, which occurs without any forcing.

The fingerprint of human-caused greenhouse gas increases is clearly apparent in the pattern of observed 20th century climate change. The observed change cannot be otherwise explained by the fingerprints of natural forcings or natural variability simulated by {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}. {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution Attribution} studies therefore support the conclusion that ‘it is extremely likely that {Topics.*Human_Influence human activities} have caused more than half of the observed increase in global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} from 1951 to 2010.’

The Earth’s climate is always changing, and that can occur for many reasons. To determine the principal causes of observed changes, we must first ascertain whether an observed change in climate is different from other fluctuations that occur without any forcing at all. Climate variability without forcing—called internal variability—is the consequence of processes within the climate system. Large-scale oceanic variability, such as El Niño-{Glossary.*Southern_Oscillation Southern Oscillation} ({Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO}) fluctuations in the Pacific Ocean, is the dominant {Glossary.*Source source} of internal {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} on decadal to centennial time scales.

Climate change can also result from natural forcings external to the climate system, such as volcanic eruptions, or changes in the brightness of the sun. Forcings such as these are responsible for the huge changes in climate that are clearly documented in the geological record. Human-caused forcings include greenhouse gas {Topics.*Emissions emissions} or atmospheric particulate pollution. Any of these forcings, natural or human caused, could affect internal variability as well as causing a change in average climate. Attribution studies attempt to determine the causes of a detected change in observed climate. Over the past century we know that global average temperature has increased, so if the observed change is forced then the principal forcing must be one that causes warming, not cooling.

Formal climate change {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution studies} are carried out using controlled experiments with climate models. The model-simulated responses to specific climate forcings are often called the fingerprints of those forcings. A climate model must reliably simulate the fingerprint patterns associated with individual forcings, as well as the patterns of unforced internal variability, in order to yield a meaningful climate change attribution assessment. No model can perfectly reproduce all features of climate, but many detailed studies indicate that simulations using current models are indeed sufficiently reliable to carry out attribution assessments.

{FAQ_10_1 FAQ 10.1}, {'FAQ_10_1_Figure_1 Figure 1} illustrates part of a fingerprint assessment of global temperature change at the surface during the late 20th century. The observed change in the latter half of the 20th century, shown by the black time series in the left panels, is larger than expected from just internal variability. Simulations driven only by natural forcings (yellow and blue lines in the upper left panel) fail to reproduce late 20th century global warming at the surface with a spatial pattern of change (upper right) completely different from the observed pattern of change (middle right). Simulations including both natural and human-caused forcings provide a much better representation of the time rate of change (lower left) and spatial pattern (lower right) of observed {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} change.

{image:'FAQ_10_1_Figure_1}

Both panels on the left show that computer models reproduce the naturally forced surface cooling observed for a year or two after major volcanic eruptions, such as occurred in 1982 and 1991. Natural forcing simulations capture the short-lived temperature changes following eruptions, but only the natural + human caused forcing simulations simulate the longer-lived warming {Glossary.*Trend trend}.

A more complete attribution assessment would examine temperature above the surface, and possibly other climate variables, in addition to the surface temperature results shown in {FAQ_10_1 FAQ 10.1}, {'FAQ_10_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}. The fingerprint patterns associated with individual forcings become easier to distinguish when more variables are considered in the assessment.

Overall, {FAQ_10_1 FAQ 10.1}, {'FAQ_10_1_Figure_1 Figure 1} shows that the pattern of observed temperature change is significantly different than the pattern of response to natural forcings alone. The simulated response to all forcings, including human-caused forcings, provides a good match to the observed changes at the surface. We cannot correctly simulate recent observed climate change without including the response to human-caused forcings, including greenhouse gases, stratospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone}, and aerosols. Natural causes of change are still at work in the climate system, but recent trends in temperature are largely attributable to human-caused forcing.
