index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * The entire genetic content of a cell is its  **genome**.
  *  **Genes** code for proteins, or stable RNA molecules, each of which carries out a specific function in the cell.
  * Although the  **genotype** that a cell possesses remains constant, expression of genes is dependent on environmental conditions.
  * A  **phenotype** is the observable characteristics of a cell (or organism) at a given point in time and results from the complement of genes currently being used.
  * The majority of genetic material is organized into  **chromosomes** that contain the DNA that controls cellular activities.
  * Prokaryotes are typically haploid, usually having a single circular chromosome found in the nucleoid. Eukaryotes are diploid; DNA is organized into multiple linear chromosomes found in the nucleus.
  * Supercoiling and DNA packaging using DNA binding proteins allows lengthy molecules to fit inside a cell. Eukaryotes and archaea use histone proteins, and bacteria use different proteins with similar function.
  * Prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes both contain  **noncoding DNA**, the function of which is not well understood. Some noncoding DNA appears to participate in the formation of small noncoding RNA molecules that influence gene expression; some appears to play a role in maintaining chromosomal structure and in DNA packaging.
  *  **Extrachromosomal DNA** in eukaryotes includes the chromosomes found within organelles of prokaryotic origin (mitochondria and chloroplasts) that evolved by endosymbiosis. Some viruses may also maintain themselves extrachromosomally.
  * Extrachromosomal DNA in prokaryotes is commonly maintained as  **plasmids** that encode a few nonessential genes that may be helpful under specific conditions. Plasmids can be spread through a bacterial community by horizontal gene transfer.
  * Viral genomes show extensive variation and may be composed of either RNA or DNA, and may be either double or single stranded.
