index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.3.1.3
title: 12.3.1.3 - The New Concentration Driven Representative Concentration Pathway Scenarios, and Their Extensions

As introduced in {Box_1_1 Box 1.1} and mentioned in {Chapters.12.12_1 Section 12.1}, a new parallel process for scenario development was proposed in order to facilitate the interactions between the scientific communities working on climate change, adaptation and {Glossary.*Mitigation mitigation} ({cite.12.'Hibbard_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Moss_et_al_2008}, 2010; van Vuuren et al., 2011). These new {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}, Representative Concentration Pathways, are referred to as pathways in order to emphasize that they are not definitive scenarios, but rather internally consistent sets of time-dependent forcing {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} that could potentially be realized with more than one underlying socioeconomic scenario. The primary products of the {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} are concentrations but they also provide gas {Topics.*Emissions emissions}. They are representative in that they are one of several different scenarios, sampling the full range of published scenarios (including mitigation scenarios) at the time they were defined, that have similar RF and emissions characteristics. They are identified by the approximate value of the RF (in W m–2) at 2100 or at stabilization after 2100 in their extensions, relative to pre-industrial ({cite.12.'Moss_et_al_2008}; Meinshausen et al., 2011c). {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} (the lowest of the four, also referred to as RCP3-PD) peaks at 3.0 W m–2 and then declines to 2.6 W m–2 in 2100, RCP4.5 (medium-low) and RCP6.0 (medium-high) stabilize after 2100 at 4.2 and 6.0 W m–2 respectively, while {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} (highest) reaches 8.3 W m–2 in 2100 on a rising trajectory (see also {'Figure_12_3 Figure 12.3}a which takes into account the efficacies of the various {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings}). The primary objective of these scenarios is to provide all the input variables necessary to run comprehensive {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} in order to reach a target RF ({'Figure_12_2 Figure 12.2}). These scenarios were developed using IAMs that provide the time evolution of a large {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forcings (concentration and emission of gas and aerosols, land use changes, etc.) and their individual RF values ({cite.12.'Moss_et_al_2008}, 2010; van Vuuren et al., 2011). Note that due to the substantial {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in RF, these forcing values should be understood as comparative ‘labels’, not as exact definitions of the forcing that is effective in climate models. This is because concentrations or emissions, rather than the RF itself, are prescribed in the CMIP5 climate model runs. The forcing as manifested in climate models is discussed in {Chapters.12.12_3.12_3_3 Section 12.3.3}.

{image:'Figure_12_3}

Various steps were necessary to turn the selected ‘raw’ RCP scenarios from the IAMs into data sets usable by the climate modelling community. First, harmonization with historical data was performed for emissions of reactive gases and aerosols ({cite.12.'Lamarque_et_al_2010}; {cite.12.'Granier_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Smith_et_al_2011}), land use ({cite.12.'Hurtt_et_al_2011}), and for GHG emissions and concentrations (Meinshausen et al., 2011c). Then atmospheric chemistry runs were performed to estimate {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} and {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} distributions ({cite.12.'Lamarque_et_al_2011}). Finally, a single {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} model with a representation of carbon–climate feedbacks was used in order to provide consistent values of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} concentration for the CO2 emission provided by a different IAM for each of the scenarios. This methodology was used to produce consistent data sets across scenarios but does not provide uncertainty estimates for them. After these processing steps, the final RCP data sets comprise land use data, harmonized GHG emissions and concentrations, gridded reactive gas and aerosol emissions, as well as ozone and aerosol abundance fields. These data are used as forcings in individual climate models. The number and type of forcings included primarily depend on the experiment. For instance, while the CO2 concentration is prescribed in most experiments, CO2 emissions are prescribed in some others (see {Box_6_4 Box 6.4} and {Chapters.12.12_3.12_3_2.12_3_2_1 Section 12.3.2.1}). Which of these forcings are included in individual CMIP5 models, and variations in their implementation, is described in {Chapters.12.12_3.12_3_2.12_3_2_2 Section 12.3.2.2}.

During this development process, the total RF and the RF of individual forcing agents have been estimated by the IAMs and made available via the RCP database (Meinshausen et al., 2011c). Each individual anthropogenic forcing varies from one scenario to another. They have been aggregated into a few groups in {'Figure_12_3 Figure 12.3}b and c. The total anthropogenic RF estimated by the IAMs in 2010 is about 0.15 W m–2 lower than {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}’s best estimate of {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} in 2010 (2.2 W m–2), the difference arising from a revision of the RF due to aerosols and land use in the current assessment compared to {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}. All the other individual forcings are consistent to within 0.02 W m–2. The change in CO2 concentration is the main cause of difference in the total RF among the scenarios ({'Figure_12_3 Figure 12.3}b). The relative contribution of CO2 to the total anthropogenic forcing is currently (year 2010) about 80 to 90% and does not vary much across the scenarios ({'Figure_12_3 Figure 12.3}c), as was also the case for {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} ({cite.12.'Ramaswamy_et_al_2001}). Aerosols have a large negative contribution to the total forcing (about –40 to –50% in 2010), but this contribution decreases (in both absolute and relative terms) in the future for all the RCPs scenarios. This means that while anthropogenic aerosols have had a cooling effect in the past, their decrease in all RCP scenarios relative to current levels is expected to have a net warming effect in the future (Levy II et al., 2013; see also {'Figure_8_20 Figure 8.20}). The 21st century decrease in the magnitude of future aerosol forcing was not as large and as rapid in the SRES scenarios ({'Figure_12_3 Figure 12.3}a). However, even in the SRES scenarios, aerosol effects were expected to have a diminishing role in the future compared to GHG forcings, mainly because of the {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} of GHG in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} ({cite.12.'Dufresne_et_al_2005}). Other forcings do not change much in the future, except {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} which increases in the RCP8.5 scenario. Note that the estimates of all of these individual RFs are subject to many uncertainties (see Sections {Chapters.7.7_5 7.5}, {Chapters.8.8_5 8.5} and {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6 11.3.6}). In this section and in Table AII.6.8, the RF values for RCP scenarios are derived from published equivalent-CO2 (CO2eq) concentration data that aggregates all anthropogenic forcings including {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} and aerosols. The conversion to RF uses the formula: RF = 3.71/ln(2) ∙ ln(CO2eq/278) W m–2, where CO2eq is in ppmv.

The four RCPs (Meinshausen et al., 2011c) are based on IAMs up to the end of the 21st century only. In order to investigate longer-term climate change implications, these RCPs were also extended until 2300. The extensions, formally named {Glossary.*Extended_Concentration_Pathways Extended Concentration Pathways} (ECPs) but often simply referred to as RCP extensions, use simple assumptions about GHG and aerosol emissions and concentrations beyond 2100 (such as stabilization or steady decline) and were designed as hypothetical ‘what-if’ scenarios, not as an outcome of an IAM assuming socioeconomic considerations beyond 2100 (Meinshausen et al., 2011c) (see {Box_1_1 Box 1.1}). In order to continue to investigate a broad range of possible climate futures, RCP2.6 assumes small constant net negative emissions after 2100 and RCP8.5 assumes stabilization with high emissions between 2100 and 2150, then a linear decrease until 2250. The two middle RCPs aim for a smooth stabilization of concentrations by 2150. RCP8.5 stabilizes concentrations only by 2250, with CO2 concentrations of approximately 2000 ppmv, nearly seven times the pre-industrial level. As RCP2.6 implies net negative CO2 emissions after around 2070 and throughout the extension, CO2 concentrations slowly reduce towards 360 ppmv by 2300.
