index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.2.2.2
title: 8.7.2.2.2 - Carbon monoxide and volatile organic compounds

{Topics.*Emissions Emissions} of carbon monoxide (CO) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs) lead to production of {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} on short time scales. By affecting OH and thereby the levels of {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} they also initiate a positive long-term ozone effect. With its {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} of 2 to 3 months, the effect of CO emissions is less dependent on location than is the case for NOX (see Table 8.A.4). There is also less variation across models. However, {cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2010 Collins et al. (2010)} found that inclusion of vegetation effects of O3 increased the GTP values for CO by 20 to 50%. By including {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} responses {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2009 Shindell et al. (2009)} found an increase in GWP100 by a factor of ~2.5. CO of fossil origin will also have a {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} effect by contributing to {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} levels. This effect adds 1.4 to 1.6 to the GWP100 for CO ({cite.8.'Daniel_and_Solomon_1998}; Derwent et al., 2001). (The vegetation and aerosol effects are not included in the numbers in Table 8.A.4.)

{Glossary.*Volatile_Organic_Compounds VOC} is not a well-defined group of hydrocarbons. This group of gases with different lifetimes is treated differently across models by lumping or using representative key species. However, the spread in {Glossary.*Metric metric} values in Table 8.A.5 is moderate across regions, with highest values for emissions in South Asia (of the four regions studied). The effects via ozone and CH4 cause warming, and the additional effects via interactions with aerosols and via the O3–CO2 link increase the warming effect further. Thus, the net effects of CO and VOC are less uncertain than for NOX for which the net is a residual between larger terms of opposite sign. However, the formation of SOAs is usually not included in metric calculations for VOC, which introduces a cooling effect and increased {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty}.
