index: hide
name: Chapter Review

The most basic type of association is a linear association. This type of relationship can be defined algebraically by the equations used, numerically with actual or predicted data values, or graphically from a plotted curve. (Lines are classified as straight curves.) Algebraically, a linear equation typically takes the form  *y = mx + b*, where  *m* and  *b* are constants,  *x* is the independent variable,  *y* is the dependent variable. In a statistical context, a linear equation is written in the form  *y = a + bx*, where  *a* and  *b* are the constants. This form is used to help readers distinguish the statistical context from the algebraic context. In the equation  *y = a + bx*, the constant  *b* that multiplies the  *x* variable ( *b* is called a coefficient) is called as the  *slope*. The slope describes the rate of change between the independent and dependent variables; in other words, the rate of change describes the change that occurs in the dependent variable as the independent variable is changed. In the equation  *y = a + bx*, the constant a is called as the  *y*-intercept. Graphically, the  *y*-intercept is the  *y* coordinate of the point where the graph of the line crosses the  *y* axis.  At this point  *x* = 0.

The  *slope of a line* is a value that describes the rate of change between the independent and dependent variables. The  *slope* tells us how the dependent variable ( *y*) changes for every one unit increase in the independent ( *x*) variable, on average. The  *y-intercept* is used to describe the dependent variable when the independent variable equals zero. Graphically, the slope is represented by three line types in elementary statistics.
