index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.3.2.1.1
title: 11.3.2.1.1 - Global mean surface air temperature

{'Figure_11_9 Figure 11.9} (a) and (b) show CMIP5 {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of global mean surface air temperature under RCP4.5. The 5 to 95% range for the projected anomaly for the period 2016–2035, relative to the reference period 1986–2005, is 0.47°C to 1.00°C (see also {'Table_12_2 Table 12.2}). However, as discussed in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_1.11_3_1_1 Section 11.3.1.1}, this range provides only a very crude measure of uncertainty, and there is no guarantee that the real world must lie within this range. Obtaining better estimates is an important challenge. One approach involves initializing {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} using observations, as discussed in {Chapters.11.11_2 Section 11.2}. {'Figure_11_9 Figure 11.9} (b) compares multi-model initialized {Topics.*Climate_Predictions climate predictions} (8 models from {cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2013b}), initialized in 2011; 14 CMIP5 decadal prediction experiment models following the methodology of {cite.11.'Meehl_and_Teng_2012 Meehl and Teng (2012)}, initialized in 2006 with the ‘raw’ uninitialized CMIP5 projections. The 5 to 95% range for both sets of initialized predictions is cooler (by about 15% for the median values) than the corresponding range for the raw projections, particularly at the upper end. The differences are partly a consequence of initializing the models in a state that is cool (in comparison to the median of the raw projections) as a result of the recent hiatus in global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} rise (see {Box_9_2 Box 9.2}). However, it is not yet possible to attribute all of the reasons with confidence because the raw projections are based on a different, and larger, set of models than the initialized predictions, and because of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} related to the bias adjustment of the initialized predictions ({cite.11.'Goddard_et_al_2013}; Meehl et al., 2013d)

{image:'Figure_11_9}

Another approach to making projections involves weighting models according to some measure of their quality (see {Chapters.9 Chapter 9}). A specific approach of this type, known as Allen, Stott and Kettleborough (ASK) ({cite.11.'Allen_et_al_2000}; {cite.11.'Stott_and_Kettleborough_2002}), is based on the use of results from {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution detection} and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution studies} ({Chapters.10 Chapter 10}), in which the fit between observations and model simulations of the past is used to scale projections of the future. ASK requires specific simulations to be carried out with individual forcings (e.g., {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} GHG forcing alone), and only some of the centres participating in CMIP5 have carried out the necessary integrations. Biases in ASK-derived projections may arise from errors in the specified forcings, or in the simulated patterns of response, and/or from nonlinearities in the responses to forcings.

{'Figure_11_9 Figure 11.9}c shows the projected range of global mean surface air temperature change derived using the ASK approach for RCP4.5 (Stott and G. Jones, 2012; {cite.11.'Stott_et_al_2013}) applied to six models and compares this with the range derived from the 42 CMIP5 models. In this case decadal means are shown. The 5 to 95% confidence interval for the projected temperature anomaly for the period 2016–2035, based on the ASK method, is 0.39°C to 0.87°C. As for the initialized predictions shown in {'Figure_11_9 Figure 11.9}b, both the lower and upper values are below the corresponding values obtained from the raw CMIP5 results, although there is substantial overlap between the two ranges. The relative cooling of the ASK results is directly related to evidence presented in {Chapters.10 Chapter 10} ({Chapters.10.10_3.10_3_1 Section 10.3.1}) that ‘This provides evidence that some CMIP5 models have a higher transient response to {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} and a larger response to other {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings} (dominated by the effects of aerosols) than the real world (medium confidence).’ The ASK results and the initialised predictions both suggest that those CMIP5 models that warm most rapidly over the period (1986–2005) to (2016–2035) may be inconsistent with the observations. This possibility is also suggested by comparing the models with the observed rate of warming since 1986—see {Box_9_2 Box 9.2} for a full discussion of this comparison. Lastly, {'Figure_11_9 Figure 11.9} also shows a statistical prediction for global mean surface air temperature, using the method of {cite.11.'Lean_and_Rind_2009 Lean and Rind (2009)}, which uses multiple linear regression to decompose observed temperature variations into distinct components. This prediction is very similar to the CMIP5 multi-model median.

The projections shown in {'Figure_11_9 Figure 11.9} assume the RCP4.5 scenario and use the 1986–2005 reference period. In {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6 Section 11.3.6} additional uncertainties associated with future forcing, climate responses and sensitivity to the choice of reference period, are discussed. An overall assessment of the likely range for future global mean surface air temperature is provided in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6.11_3_6_3 Section 11.3.6.3}.

For the remaining projections in this chapter the spread among the CMIP5 models is used as a simple, but crude, measure of uncertainty.

The extent of agreement between the CMIP5 projections provides rough guidance about the {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} of a particular outcome. But—as partly illustrated by the discussion above—it must be kept firmly in mind that the real world could fall outside of the range spanned by these particular models. See {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6 Section 11.3.6} for further discussion.
