index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.4.1
title: 8.3.4.1 - Introduction and Summary of AR4

In {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({cite.8.'Forster_et_al_2007}), RF estimates were provided for three {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} effects. These were the RF of {Glossary.*Aerosol_radiation_interaction aerosol–radiation interaction} (previously denoted as {Glossary.*Direct_aerosol_effect direct aerosol effect}), RF of the {Glossary.*Aerosol_cloud_interaction aerosol–cloud interaction} (previously denoted as the cloud {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} effect), and the impact of {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} on snow and ice surface albedo. See {Chapters.7 Chapter 7} and {'Figure_7_3 Figure 7.3} for an explanation of the change in terminology between AR4 and AR5. The RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction is scattering and absorption of shortwave and {Glossary.*Longwave_radiation longwave radiation} by atmospheric aerosols. Several different aerosol types from various sources are present in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} (see {Chapters.8.8_2 Section 8.2}). Most of the aerosols primarily scatter {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation}, but some components absorb solar radiation to various extents with BC as the most absorbing component. RF of aerosols in the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} is often calculated at the TOA because it is similar to {Glossary.*Tropopause tropopause} values ({cite.8.'Forster_et_al_2007}). A best estimate RF of –0.5 ± 0.4 W m–2 was given in AR4 for the change in the net aerosol–radiation interaction between 1750 and 2005 and a medium to low level of scientific understanding (LOSU).

An increase in the hygroscopic aerosol abundance may enhance the concentration of cloud condensation nuclei ({Glossary.*Cloud_condensation_nuclei CCN}). This may increase the cloud albedo and under the assumption of fixed cloud water content this effect was given a best estimate of –0.7 W m–2 (range from –1.8 to –0.3) in AR4 and a low LOSU.

BC in the snow or ice can lead to a decrease of the surface albedo. This leads to a positive RF. In AR4 this mechanism was given a best RF estimate of 0.1 ± 0.1 W m–2 and a low LOSU.

Impacts on clouds from the {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} of aerosol–cloud interaction (including both effects previously denoted as cloud {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} and cloud albedo effect) and the ERF of aerosol–radiation interaction (including both effects previously denoted as direct aerosol effect and semi-direct effect) were not strictly in accordance with the RF concept, because they involve tropospheric changes in variables other than the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} agent at least in the available model estimates, so no best RF estimates were provided in AR4 (see {Chapters.8.8_1 Section 8.1}). However, the ERF of aerosol– cloud and aerosol–radiation interactions were included in the discussion of total aerosol effect in {Chapters.7 Chapter 7} in AR4 ({cite.8.'Denman_et_al_2007}). The mechanisms influenced by {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} aerosol including the aerosol cloud interactions are discussed in detail in this assessment in {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5} and summarized in the subsections that follow.
