index: hide
name: Initiation of Transcription in Prokaryotes

Prokaryotes do not have membrane-enclosed nuclei. Therefore, the processes of transcription, translation, and mRNA degradation can all occur simultaneously. The intracellular level of a bacterial protein can quickly be amplified by multiple transcription and translation events occurring concurrently on the same DNA template. Prokaryotic transcription often covers more than one gene and produces polycistronic mRNAs that specify more than one protein.

Our discussion here will exemplify transcription by describing this process in  *Escherichia coli*, a well-studied bacterial species. Although some differences exist between transcription in  *E. coli* and transcription in archaea, an understanding of  *E. coli*transcription can be applied to virtually all bacterial species.

## Prokaryotic RNA Polymerase

Prokaryotes use the same RNA polymerase to transcribe all of their genes. In  *E. coli*, the polymerase is composed of five polypeptide subunits, two of which are identical. Four of these subunits, denoted  *α*,  *α*,  *β*, and  *β*' comprise the polymerase  **core enzyme**. These subunits assemble every time a gene is transcribed, and they disassemble once transcription is complete. Each subunit has a unique role; the two  *α*-subunits are necessary to assemble the polymerase on the DNA; the  *β*-subunit binds to the ribonucleoside triphosphate that will become part of the nascent “recently born” mRNA molecule; and the  *β*' binds the DNA template strand. The fifth subunit,  *σ*, is involved only in transcription initiation. It confers transcriptional specificity such that the polymerase begins to synthesize mRNA from an appropriate initiation site. Without  *σ*, the core enzyme would transcribe from random sites and would produce mRNA molecules that specified protein gibberish. The polymerase comprised of all five subunits is called the  **holoenzyme**.

## Prokaryotic Promoters

A  **promoter** is a DNA sequence onto which the transcription machinery binds and initiates transcription. In most cases, promoters exist upstream of the genes they regulate. The specific sequence of a promoter is very important because it determines whether the corresponding gene is transcribed all the time, some of the time, or infrequently. Although promoters vary among prokaryotic genomes, a few elements are conserved. At the -10 and -35 regions upstream of the initiation site, there are two promoter  **consensus** sequences, or regions that are similar across all promoters and across various bacterial species ({'Figure_15_2_1 Figure 15.2.1}). The -10 consensus sequence, called the -10 region, is TATAAT. The -35 sequence, TTGACA, is recognized and bound by  *σ*. Once this interaction is made, the subunits of the core enzyme bind to the site. The A–T-rich -10 region facilitates unwinding of the DNA template, and several phosphodiester bonds are made. The transcription initiation phase ends with the production of abortive transcripts, which are polymers of approximately 10 nucleotides that are made and released.


{image:'Figure_15_2_1}
        
