index: hide
name: Muscles That Move the Humerus

Similar to the muscles that position the pectoral girdle, muscles that cross the shoulder joint and move the humerus bone of the arm include both axial and scapular muscles ({'Figure_11_5_2 Figure 11.5.2} and {'Figure_11_5_3 Figure 11.5.3}). The two axial muscles are the pectoralis major and the latissimus dorsi. The  **pectoralis major** is thick and fan-shaped, covering much of the superior portion of the anterior thorax. The broad, triangular  **latissimus dorsi** is located on the inferior part of the back, where it inserts into a thick connective tissue shealth called an aponeurosis.


{image:'Figure_11_5_2}
        


{image:'Figure_11_5_3}
        

The rest of the shoulder muscles originate on the scapula. The anatomical and ligamental structure of the shoulder joint and the arrangements of the muscles covering it, allows the arm to carry out different types of movements. The  **deltoid**, the thick muscle that creates the rounded lines of the shoulder is the major abductor of the arm, but it also facilitates flexing and medial rotation, as well as extension and lateral rotation. The  **subscapularis** originates on the anterior scapula and medially rotates the arm. Named for their locations, the  **supraspinatus** (superior to the spine of the scapula) and the  **infraspinatus** (inferior to the spine of the scapula) abduct the arm, and laterally rotate the arm, respectively. The thick and flat  **teres major** is inferior to the teres minor and extends the arm, and assists in adduction and medial rotation of it. The long  **teres minor** laterally rotates and extends the arm. Finally, the  **coracobrachialis** flexes and adducts the arm.

The tendons of the deep subscapularis, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor connect the scapula to the humerus, forming the  **rotator cuff** (musculotendinous cuff), the circle of tendons around the shoulder joint. When baseball pitchers undergo shoulder surgery it is usually on the rotator cuff, which becomes pinched and inflamed, and may tear away from the bone due to the repetitive motion of bring the arm overhead to throw a fast pitch.
