index: hide
name: Muscles That Move the Wrist, Hand, and Fingers

Wrist, hand, and finger movements are facilitated by two groups of muscles. The forearm is the origin of the  **extrinsic muscles of the hand**. The palm is the origin of the intrinsic muscles of the hand.

## Muscles of the Arm That Move the Wrists, Hands, and Fingers

The muscles in the  **anterior compartment of the forearm** (anterior flexor compartment of the forearm) originate on the humerus and insert onto different parts of the hand. These make up the bulk of the forearm. From lateral to medial, the  **superficial anterior compartment of the forearm** includes the  **flexor carpi radialis**,  **palmaris longus**,  **flexor carpi ulnaris**, and  **flexor digitorum superficialis**. The flexor digitorum superficialis flexes the hand as well as the digits at the knuckles, which allows for rapid finger movements, as in typing or playing a musical instrument (see {'Figure_11_5_6 Figure 11.5.6} and ). However, poor ergonomics can irritate the tendons of these muscles as they slide back and forth with the carpal tunnel of the anterior wrist and pinch the median nerve, which also travels through the tunnel, causing Carpal Tunnel Syndrome. The  **deep anterior compartment** produces flexion and bends fingers to make a fist. These are the  **flexor pollicis longus** and the  **flexor digitorum profundus**.

The muscles in the  **superficial posterior compartment of the forearm** (superficial posterior extensor compartment of the forearm) originate on the humerus. These are the  **extensor radialis longus**,  **extensor carpi radialis brevis**,  **extensor digitorum**,  **extensor digiti minimi**, and the  **extensor carpi ulnaris**.

The muscles of the  **deep posterior compartment of the forearm** (deep posterior extensor compartment of the forearm) originate on the radius and ulna. These include the  **abductor pollicis longus**,  **extensor pollicis brevis**,  **extensor pollicis longus**, and  **extensor indicis** (see {'Figure_11_5_6 Figure 11.5.6}).


{image:'Figure_11_5_6}
        

The tendons of the forearm muscles attach to the wrist and extend into the hand. Fibrous bands called  **retinacula** sheath the tendons at the wrist. The  **flexor retinaculum** extends over the palmar surface of the hand while the  **extensor retinaculum** extends over the dorsal surface of the hand.

## Intrinsic Muscles of the Hand

The  **intrinsic muscles of the hand** both originate and insert within it ({'Figure_11_5_7 Figure 11.5.7}). These muscles allow your fingers to also make precise movements for actions, such as typing or writing. These muscles are divided into three groups. The  **thenar** muscles are on the radial aspect of the palm. The  **hypothenar** muscles are on the medial aspect of the palm, and the  **intermediate** muscles are midpalmar.

The thenar muscles include the  **abductor pollicis brevis**,  **opponens pollicis**,  **flexor pollicis brevis**, and the  **adductor pollicis**. These muscles form the  **thenar eminence**, the rounded contour of the base of the thumb, and all act on the thumb. The movements of the thumb play an integral role in most precise movements of the hand.

The hypothenar muscles include the  **abductor digiti minimi**,  **flexor digiti minimi brevis**, and the  **opponens digiti minimi**. These muscles form the  **hypothenar eminence**, the rounded contour of the little finger, and as such, they all act on the little finger. Finally, the intermediate muscles act on all the fingers and include the  **lumbrical**, the  **palmar interossei**, and the  **dorsal interossei**.


{image:'Figure_11_5_7}
        


****

| Muscle | Movement | Target | Target motion direction | Prime mover | Origin | Insertion |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Thenar muscles | Moves thumb toward body | Thumb | Abduction | Abductor pollicis brevis | Flexor retinaculum; and nearby carpals | Lateral base of proximal phalanx of thumb |
| Thenar muscles | Moves thumb across palm to touch other fingers | Thumb | Opposition | Opponens pollicis | Flexor retinaculum; trapezium | Anterior of first metacarpal |
| Thenar muscles | Flexes thumb | Thumb | Flexion | Flexor pollicis brevis | Flexor retinaculum; trapezium | Lateral base of proximal phalanx of thumb |
| Thenar muscles | Moves thumb away from body | Thumb | Adduction | Adductor pollicis | Capitate bone; bases of metacarpals 2–4; front of metacarpal 3 | Medial base of proximal phalanx of thumb |
| Hypothenar muscles | Moves little finger toward body | Little finger | Abduction | Abductor digiti minimi | Pisiform bone | Medial side of proximal phalanx of little finger |
| Hypothenar muscles | Flexes little finger | Little finger | Flexion | Flexor digiti minimi brevis | Hamate bone; flexor retinaculum | Medial side of proximal phalanx of little finger |
| Hypothenar muscles | Moves little finger across palm to touch thumb | Little finger | Opposition | Opponens digiti minimi | Hamate bone; flexor retinaculum | Medial side of fifth metacarpal |
| Intermediate muscles | Flexes each finger at metacarpo-phalangeal joints; extends each finger at interphalangeal joints | Fingers | Flexion | Lumbricals | Palm (lateral sides of tendons in flexor digitorum profundus) | Fingers 2–5 (lateral edges of extensional expansions on first phalanges) |
| Intermediate muscles | Adducts and flexes each finger at metacarpo-phalangeal joints; extends each finger at interphalangeal joints | Fingers | Adduction; flexion; extension | Palmar interossei | Side of each metacarpal that faces metacarpal 3 (absent from metacarpal 3) | Extensor expansion on first phalanx of each finger (except finger 3) on side facing finger 3 |
| Intermediate muscles | Abducts and flexes the three middle fingers at metacarpo-phalangeal joints; extends the three middle fingers at interphalangeal joints | Fingers | Abduction; flexion; extension | Dorsal interossei | Sides of metacarpals | Both sides of finger 3; for each other finger, extensor expansion over first phalanx on side opposite finger 3 |
    
