index: hide
name: Ribs

Each rib is a curved, flattened bone that contributes to the wall of the thorax. The ribs articulate posteriorly with the T1–T12 thoracic vertebrae, and most attach anteriorly via their costal cartilages to the sternum. There are 12 pairs of ribs. The ribs are numbered 1–12 in accordance with the thoracic vertebrae.

## Parts of a Typical Rib

The posterior end of a typical rib is called the  **head of the rib** (see {'Figure_7_3_8 Figure 7.3.8}). This region articulates primarily with the costal facet located on the body of the same numbered thoracic vertebra and to a lesser degree, with the costal facet located on the body of the next higher vertebra. Lateral to the head is the narrowed  **neck of the rib**. A small bump on the posterior rib surface is the  **tubercle of the rib**, which articulates with the facet located on the transverse process of the same numbered vertebra. The remainder of the rib is the  **body of the rib** (shaft). Just lateral to the tubercle is the  **angle of the rib**, the point at which the rib has its greatest degree of curvature. The angles of the ribs form the most posterior extent of the thoracic cage. In the anatomical position, the angles align with the medial border of the scapula. A shallow  **costal groove** for the passage of blood vessels and a nerve is found along the inferior margin of each rib.

## Rib Classifications

The bony ribs do not extend anteriorly completely around to the sternum. Instead, each rib ends in a  **costal cartilage**. These cartilages are made of hyaline cartilage and can extend for several inches. Most ribs are then attached, either directly or indirectly, to the sternum via their costal cartilage (see {'Figure_7_4_1 Figure 7.4.1}). The ribs are classified into three groups based on their relationship to the sternum.

Ribs 1–7 are classified as  **true ribs** (vertebrosternal ribs). The costal cartilage from each of these ribs attaches directly to the sternum. Ribs 8–12 are called  **false ribs** (vertebrochondral ribs). The costal cartilages from these ribs do not attach directly to the sternum. For ribs 8–10, the costal cartilages are attached to the cartilage of the next higher rib. Thus, the cartilage of rib 10 attaches to the cartilage of rib 9, rib 9 then attaches to rib 8, and rib 8 is attached to rib 7. The last two false ribs (11–12) are also called  **floating ribs** (vertebral ribs). These are short ribs that do not attach to the sternum at all. Instead, their small costal cartilages terminate within the musculature of the lateral abdominal wall.
