index: hide
name: The World’s Growing Energy Needs

World energy consumption continues to rise, especially in the developing countries. (See {'Figure_8_9_2a Figure 8.9.2a}.) Global demand for energy has tripled in the past 50 years and might triple again in the next 30 years. While much of this growth will come from the rapidly booming economies of China and India, many of the developed countries, especially those in Europe, are hoping to meet their energy needs by expanding the use of renewable sources. Although presently only a small percentage, renewable energy is growing very fast, especially wind energy. For example, Germany plans to meet 20% of its electricity and 10% of its overall energy needs with renewable resources by the year 2020. (See {'Figure_8_9_3a Figure 8.9.3a}.) Energy is a key constraint in the rapid economic growth of China and India. In 2003, China surpassed Japan as the world’s second largest consumer of oil. However, over 1/3 of this is imported. Unlike most Western countries, coal dominates the commercial energy resources of China, accounting for 2/3 of its energy consumption. In 2009 China surpassed the United States as the largest generator of <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><msub><mtext>CO</mtext><mrow><mn>2</mn></mrow></msub></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;&quot;CO&quot; rSub &#123; size 8&#123;2&#125; &#125; &#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>. In India, the main energy resources are biomass (wood and dung) and coal. Half of India’s oil is imported. About 70% of India’s electricity is generated by highly polluting coal. Yet there are sizeable strides being made in renewable energy. India has a rapidly growing wind energy base, and it has the largest solar cooking program in the world. 


{image:'Figure_8_9_2a}
        


{image:'Figure_8_9_3a}
        

 displays the 2006 commercial energy mix by country for some of the prime energy users in the world. While non-renewable sources dominate, some countries get a sizeable percentage of their electricity from renewable resources. For example, about 67% of New Zealand’s electricity demand is met by hydroelectric. Only 10% of the U.S. electricity is generated by renewable resources, primarily hydroelectric. It is difficult to determine total contributions of renewable energy in some countries with a large rural population, so these percentages in this table are left blank.


| Country | Consumption, in EJ (10<sup>18</sup> J) | Oil | Natural Gas | Coal | Nuclear | Hydro | Other Renewables | Electricity Use per capita (kWh/yr) | Energy Use per capita (GJ/yr) |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Australia | 5.4 | 34% | 17% | 44% | 0% | 3% | 1% | 10000 | 260 |
| Brazil | 9.6 | 48% | 7% | 5% | 1% | 35% | 2% | 2000 | 50 |
| China | 63 | 22% | 3% | 69% | 1% | 6% |  | 1500 | 35 |
| Egypt | 2.4 | 50% | 41% | 1% | 0% | 6% |  | 990 | 32 |
| Germany | 16 | 37% | 24% | 24% | 11% | 1% | 3% | 6400 | 173 |
| India | 15 | 34% | 7% | 52% | 1% | 5% |  | 470 | 13 |
| Indonesia | 4.9 | 51% | 26% | 16% | 0% | 2% | 3% | 420 | 22 |
| Japan | 24 | 48% | 14% | 21% | 12% | 4% | 1% | 7100 | 176 |
| New Zealand | 0.44 | 32% | 26% | 6% | 0% | 11% | 19% | 8500 | 102 |
| Russia | 31 | 19% | 53% | 16% | 5% | 6% |  | 5700 | 202 |
| U.S. | 105 | 40% | 23% | 22% | 8% | 3% | 1% | 12500 | 340 |
|  *World* |  *432* |  *39%* |  *23%* |  *24%* |  *6%* |  *6%* |  *2%* |  *2600* |  *71* |
    
