index: hide
name: Virusoids

A second type of pathogenic RNA that can infect commercially important agricultural crops are the  **virusoid** **s**, which are subviral particles best described as non–self-replicating ssRNAs. RNA replication of  **virusoid**s is similar to that of viroids but, unlike viroids, virusoids require that the cell also be infected with a specific “helper” virus. There are currently only five described types of virusoids and their associated  **helper viruses**. The helper viruses are all from the family of  **Sobemoviruses**. An example of a helper virus is the subterranean clover mottle virus, which has an associated virusoid packaged inside the viral capsid. Once the helper virus enters the host cell, the virusoids are released and can be found free in plant cell cytoplasm, where they possess ribozyme activity. The helper virus undergoes typical viral replication independent of the activity of the virusoid. The virusoid genomes are small, only 220 to 388 nucleotides long. A virusoid genome does not code for any proteins, but instead serves only to replicate virusoid RNA.

Virusoids belong to a larger group of infectious agents called  **satellite RNA**s, which are similar pathogenic RNAs found in animals. Unlike the plant virusoids, satellite RNAs may encode for proteins; however, like plant virusoids, satellite RNAs must coinfect with a helper virus to replicate. One satellite RNA that infects humans and that has been described by some scientists as a virusoid is the  **hepatitis delta virus (HDV)**, which, by some reports, is also called hepatitis delta virusoid. Much larger than a plant virusoid, HDV has a circular, ssRNA genome of 1,700 nucleotides and can direct the biosynthesis of HDV-associated proteins. The HDV helper virus is the  **hepatitis B virus (HBV)**. Coinfection with HBV and HDV results in more severe pathological changes in the liver during infection, which is how HDV was first discovered.
