index: hide
name: Prions

At one time, scientists believed that any infectious particle must contain DNA or RNA. Then, in 1982, Stanley  **Prusiner**, a medical doctor studying scrapie (a fatal, degenerative disease in sheep) discovered that the disease was caused by proteinaceous infectious particles, or  **prion** **s**. Because proteins are acellular and do not contain DNA or RNA, Prusiner’s findings were originally met with resistance and skepticism; however, his research was eventually validated, and he received the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1997.

A prion is a misfolded rogue form of a normal protein (PrPc) found in the cell. This rogue prion protein (PrPsc), which may be caused by a genetic mutation or occur spontaneously, can be infectious, stimulating other endogenous normal proteins to become misfolded, forming plaques (see {'Figure_6_4_prion Figure 6.4.prion}). Today, prions are known to cause various forms of  **transmissible spongiform encephalopathy** (TSE) in human and animals. TSE is a rare degenerative disorder that affects the brain and nervous system. The accumulation of rogue proteins causes the brain tissue to become sponge-like, killing brain cells and forming holes in the tissue, leading to brain damage, loss of motor coordination, and dementia (see {'Figure_6_4_CJDbrain Figure 6.4.CJDbrain}). Infected individuals are mentally impaired and become unable to move or speak. There is no cure, and the disease progresses rapidly, eventually leading to death within a few months or years.


{image:'Figure_6_4_prion}
        


{image:'Figure_6_4_CJDbrain}
        

TSEs in humans include  **kuru**,  **fatal familial insomnia**,  **Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease**, and  **Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease** (see {'Figure_6_4_CJDbrain Figure 6.4.CJDbrain}). TSEs in animals include  **mad cow disease**,  **scrapie** (in sheep and goats), and  **chronic wasting disease** (in elk and deer). TSEs can be transmitted between animals and from animals to humans by eating contaminated meat or animal feed. Transmission between humans can occur through heredity (as is often the case with GSS and CJD) or by contact with contaminated tissue, as might occur during a blood transfusion or organ transplant. There is no evidence for transmission via casual contact with an infected person.  lists TSEs that affect humans and their modes of transmission.


****

|  **Disease** |  **Mechanism(s) of Transmission** |
|:-:|:-:|
| Sporadic CJD (sCJD) | Not known; possibly by alteration of normal prior protein (PrP) to rogue form due to somatic mutation |
| Variant CJD (vCJD) | Eating contaminated cattle products and by secondary bloodborne transmission |
| Familial CJD (fCJD) | Mutation in germline PrP gene |
| Iatrogenic CJD (iCJD) | Contaminated neurosurgical instruments, corneal graft, gonadotrophic hormone, and, secondarily, by blood transfusion |
| Kuru | Eating infected meat through ritualistic cannibalism |
| Gerstmann-Straussler-Scheinker disease (GSS) | Mutation in germline PrP gene |
| Fatal familial insomnia (FFI) | Mutation in germline PrP gene |
    

Prions are extremely difficult to destroy because they are resistant to heat, chemicals, and radiation. Even standard sterilization procedures do not ensure the destruction of these particles. Currently, there is no treatment or cure for TSE disease, and contaminated meats or infected animals must be handled according to federal guidelines to prevent transmission.
