index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.3.3.4
title: 4.3.3.4 - Global Scale Glacier Mass Changes—The Contribution to Sea Level

Global time series are required to assess the continuing contribution of glacier mass changes to sea level (see {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_2 Section 13.4.2} for discussion of the small proportion of ice loss from glaciers that does not contribute to sea level rise). A series of recent studies, some updated to RGI areas for this report by their respective authors, provides very high confidence in a considerable and continuous mass loss, despite only medium agreement on the specific rates ({'Figure_4_12 Figure 4.12} and {'Table_4_5 Table 4.5}). Cogley (updated from, 2009b) compiled 4,817 directly measured annual mass budgets, and 983 volume change measurements by extending the data set of WGMS (2009, and earlier issues ). Global 5-year averages for 1961–2010, with {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}, were estimated from these using an inverse-distance-weighted interpolation. Newly available volume change measurements increased the proportion of observations from {Glossary.*Calving calving} glaciers from 3% to 16% compared to earlier estimates reported by {cite.4.'Lemke_et_al_2007 Lemke et al. (2007)}. This proportion is more realistic, but may still underestimate the relative importance of calving glaciers ({'Figure_4_8 Figure 4.8} and {Chapters.4.4_3.4_3_3.4_3_3_3 Section 4.3.3.3}).

{image:'Figure_4_12}

{table:'Table_4_5}

Leclercq et al. (updated from 2011) used length variations from 382 glaciers worldwide as a {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} for glacier mass loss since 1800. The length/mass change conversion was calibrated against mass balance observations for 1950–2005 from {cite.4.'Cogley_2009b Cogley (2009b)} and provide one estimate based on the arithmetic mean and another based on area-weighted extrapolation of regional averages. Uncertainty was estimated from upper and lower bounds of the calibration parameter assumptions, and cumulatively propagated backward in time. For the 19th century, the information was constrained by a limited number of observations, particularly in extensively glacierized regions that contribute most to the global mass budget.

Two global-scale time series are obtained from mass-balance modelling based on temperature and precipitation data ({cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Hirabayashi_et_al_2013}). {Glossary.*Glacier Glacier} size adjustments are simulated by using area–volume power-law relations as proposed by {cite.4.'Bahr_et_al_1997 Bahr et al. (1997)} for the approximately 170,000 individual glaciers delineated in the RGI. {cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012 Marzeion et al. (2012)} derive mass balances for 1902–2009 from monthly mean temperature and precipitation obtained from {cite.4.'Mitchell_and_Jones_2005 Mitchell and Jones (2005)}. The model is calibrated against measured time series and validated against independent measurements. Uncertainty estimates are obtained from comprehensive error propagation, first accumulated temporally for each glacier, and then regionally and globally. The model does not account for the subsurface mass balance or calving, but reproduces geodetically measured volume changes for land-based glaciers within the uncertainties; however, it underestimates volume loss slightly for calving glaciers. {cite.4.'Hirabayashi_et_al_2013 Hirabayashi et al. (2013)} force an extended positive degree-day model with data from an observation-based global set of daily precipitation and near-{Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} as updated from earlier work ({cite.4.'Hirabayashi_et_al_2008}). Annual mass balance is provided for 1948–2005 with a constant root mean square error of 500 km3 yr–1, estimated from comparison of modelled with measured mass balances.

For the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic ({Topics.*Regional_Climate region} 19) observational information is limited and difficult to incorporate into this assessment. For some studies the time spans do not match (e.g., {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013} give only mean mass change for 2003–2009). Some estimates have been made simply by extrapolating the global mean to region 19 ({cite.4.'Cogley_2009a}; {cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012}). One (1961–2004) mean glacier mass loss estimate based on an ECMWF 40-year {Topics.*Reanalysis reanalysis} (ERA-40) driven simulation ({cite.4.'Hock_et_al_2009}), is for a glacier area differing from the RGI region 19. For these reasons, the Antarctic and Sub-Antarctic (region 19) is excluded from this global glacier mass change assessment. The contribution of region 19 to sea level is assumed to be within the uncertainty bounds of the Antarctic {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} assessment ({Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_2 Section 4.4.2}). Whereas {cite.4.'Hirabayashi_et_al_2013 Hirabayashi et al. (2013)} exclude the Antarctic and Greenland from their simulations and {cite.4.'Leclercq_et_al_2011 Leclercq et al. (2011)} implicitly include Greenland, both {cite.4.'Cogley_2009a Cogley (2009a)} and {cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012 Marzeion et al. (2012)} explicitly estimate mass changes in Greenland. In {'Figure_4_12 Figure 4.12}, cumulative mass changes and corresponding rates are shown for global glaciers excluding regions 5 and 19 (bold lines), and also for global glaciers excluding only region 19 (thin lines). The cumulative curves are normalized such that their 1986–2005 averages are all zero.

The arithmetic-mean estimate of {cite.4.'Leclercq_et_al_2011 Leclercq et al. (2011)} indicates continuous mass loss from glaciers after about 1850 ({'Figure_4_12 Figure 4.12}a, top). During the 1920s their area-weighted extrapolation reaches considerably higher rates ({'Figure_4_12 Figure 4.12}a, bottom) than the other estimates, but the reasons remain unclear. After 1950, mass loss rates including Greenland are all within the uncertainty bounds of those that exclude Greenland, except for the 2001–2005 period when the Greenland contribution was slightly outside the uncertainty bounds for both the Cogley and the Marzeion et al. estimates. Most notable is the rapid loss from Greenland glaciers in the Marzeion et al. simulations during the 1930s. Other studies support rapid Greenland mass loss around this time ({cite.4.'Zeeberg_and_Forman_2001}; {cite.4.'Yde_and_Knudsen_2007}, and references therein; Bjørk et al., 2012; {cite.4.'Zdanowicz_et_al_2012}); however, the neighbouring regions in the Canadian Arctic (south and north) and Iceland have mass loss anomalies an order of magnitude lower than {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} for Greenland in the same simulation. This discrepancy may be an artefact of the uncertainties in the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} and methods of Marzeion et al. that are considerably larger in the first than in the second half of the 20th century, so that the rates may well be overestimated. The Marzeion et al. rates are also considerably greater in the 1950s and 1960s than in the other studies; during this period, the most rapid losses are in Arctic Canada and the Russian Arctic ({cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012}).

Overall, there is very high confidence that globally, the mass loss from glaciers has increased since the 1960s, and this is evident in regional-scale estimates ({'Figure_4_11 Figure 4.11}). For 2003–2009, {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} indicate that some regional ({Chapters.4.4_3.4_3_3.4_3_3_3 Section 4.3.3.3} and {'Figure_4_11 Figure 4.11}) and also the global time series may overestimate mass loss ({'Figure_4_12 Figure 4.12}b, bottom). That glaciers with measured mass balances are concentrated in sub-regions with higher mass losses definitely biases the estimates of {cite.4.'Cogley_2009a Cogley (2009a)} ({Chapters.4.4_3.4_3_3.4_3_3_3 Section 4.3.3.3}), but this explanation cannot hold for the {cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012 Marzeion et al. (2012)} time series, for which mass changes are simulated separately for every single glacier in the inventory. It also remains unclear whether the 2003–2009 inconsistency identified by {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} applies to earlier times, and if so how it should be reconciled. Neither the evidence nor our level of understanding warrants any simple correction of the longer time series at present.

{'Table_4_5 Table 4.5} summarizes global-scale glacier mass losses for different periods relevant to discussions on {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} ({Chapters.13 Chapter 13}) and the global {Topics.*Radiation_Budgets energy budget} ({Chapters.3 Chapter 3}). Values are given separately for the Greenland glaciers alone (region 5) and for all glaciers excluding those in regions 5 and 19, which are included in the assessment of ice sheets ({Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_2 Section 4.4.2}). For the more recent periods, the time series of {cite.4.'Cogley_2009a Cogley (2009a)} and {cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012 Marzeion et al. (2012)} are combined, while for 1901–1990 the {cite.4.'Leclercq_et_al_2011 Leclercq et al. (2011)} series were separated by area-weighting and combined with the {cite.4.'Marzeion_et_al_2012 Marzeion et al. (2012)} values. Each rate in {'Table_4_5 Table 4.5} is thus the arithmetic mean of two series, with a confidence bound calculated from their difference, and assessed to represent the 90% {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} range. Because differences between the two time series vary considerably, the average confidence bound of 1971–2009 is also applied uniformly to the two sub-periods 1993– 2009 and 2005–2009. The 2003–2009 estimate of {cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013 Gardner et al. (2013)} is lower than the Cogley and Marzeion averages but those for all glaciers excluding regions 5 and 19 are within the 2005–2009 90% confidence bound. The 1991–2009 assessment is shown as a cumulative time series in {Chapters.4.4_8 Section 4.8} (see {'Figure_4_25 Figure 4.25}). Earlier studies of the long-term contribution of glaciers to {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} ({cite.4.'Meier_1984}; {cite.4.'Zuo_and_Oerlemans_1997}; {cite.4.'Gregory_and_Oerlemans_1998}; {cite.4.'Kaser_et_al_2006}; {cite.4.'Lemke_et_al_2007}; {cite.4.'Oerlemans_et_al_2007}; {cite.4.'Hock_et_al_2009}, with removal of Antarctic glacier contribution) all give smaller estimates than those assessed here.
