index: hide
name: Taxonomy and Systematics

Assigning prokaryotes to a certain species is challenging. They do not reproduce sexually, so it is not possible to classify them according to the presence or absence of interbreeding. Also, they do not have many morphological features. Traditionally, the classification of prokaryotes was based on their shape, staining patterns, and biochemical or physiological differences. More recently, as technology has improved, the nucleotide sequences in genes have become an important criterion of microbial classification.

In 1923, American microbiologist David Hendricks Bergey (1860–1937) published  *A Manual in Determinative Bacteriology.* With this manual, he attempted to summarize the information about the kinds of bacteria known at that time, using Latin binomial classification. Bergey also included the morphological, physiological, and biochemical properties of these organisms. His manual has been updated multiple times to include newer bacteria and their properties. It is a great aid in bacterial taxonomy and methods of characterization of bacteria. A more recent sister publication, the five-volume  **Bergey’s Manual** *of Systematic Bacteriology*, expands on Bergey’s original manual. It includes a large number of additional species, along with up-to-date descriptions of the taxonomy and biological properties of all named prokaryotic taxa. This publication incorporates the approved names of bacteria as determined by the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN).

## Classification by Staining Patterns

According to their  **staining patterns**, which depend on the properties of their cell walls, bacteria have traditionally been classified into gram-positive, gram-negative, and “atypical,” meaning neither gram-positive nor gram-negative. As explained in <link:>,  **gram-positive bacteria** possess a thick peptidoglycan cell wall that retains the primary stain (crystal violet) during the decolorizing step; they remain purple after the gram-stain procedure because the crystal violet dominates the light red/pink color of the secondary counterstain, safranin. In contrast,  **gram-negative bacteria** possess a thin peptidoglycan cell wall that does not prevent the crystal violet from washing away during the decolorizing step; therefore, they appear light red/pink after staining with the safranin. Bacteria that cannot be stained by the standard Gram stain procedure are called  **atypical bacteria**. Included in the atypical category are species of  **Mycoplasma** and  **Chlamydia**.  **Rickettsia** are also considered atypical because they are too small to be evaluated by the Gram stain.

More recently, scientists have begun to further classify gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. They have added a special group of  **deeply branching bacteria** based on a combination of physiological, biochemical, and genetic features. They also now further classify gram-negative bacteria into  **Proteobacteria**,  **Cytophaga-Flavobacterium-Bacteroides (CFB)**, and  **spirochetes**.

The deeply branching bacteria are thought to be a very early evolutionary form of bacteria (see <link:>). They live in hot, acidic, ultraviolet-light-exposed, and anaerobic (deprived of oxygen) conditions. Proteobacteria is a phylum of very diverse groups of gram-negative bacteria; it includes some important human pathogens (e.g.,  *E. coli* and  **Bordetella pertussis**). The  **CFB group** of bacteria includes components of the normal human gut microbiota, like  **Bacteroides**. The spirochetes are spiral-shaped bacteria and include the pathogen  **Treponema pallidum**, which causes syphilis. We will characterize these groups of bacteria in more detail later in the chapter.

Based on their prevalence of guanine and cytosine nucleotides, gram-positive bacteria are also classified into low G+C and  **high G+C gram-positive bacteria**. The  **low G+C gram-positive bacteria** have less than 50% of guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA. They include human pathogens, such as those that cause  **anthrax** ( **Bacillus anthracis**),  **tetanus** ( **Clostridium tetani**), and  **listeriosis** ( **Listeria monocytogenes**). High G+C gram-positive bacteria, which have more than 50% guanine and cytosine nucleotides in their DNA, include the bacteria that cause diphtheria ( **Corynebacterium diphtheriae**),  **tuberculosis** ( **Mycobacterium tuberculosis**), and other diseases.

The classifications of prokaryotes are constantly changing as new species are being discovered. We will describe them in more detail, along with the diseases they cause, in later sections and chapters.
