index: hide
name: B-Cell Receptors

Like T cells, B cells possess antigen-specific receptors with diverse specificities. Although they rely on T cells for optimum function, B cells can be activated without help from T cells.  **B-cell receptors (BCRs)** for naïve mature B cells are membrane-bound monomeric forms of  **IgD** and  **IgM**. They have two identical  **heavy chains** and two identical  **light chains** connected by disulfide bonds into a basic “Y” shape ({'Figure_18_4_BCR Figure 18.4.BCR}). The trunk of the Y-shaped molecule, the constant region of the two heavy chains, spans the B cell membrane. The two  **antigen-binding sites** exposed to the exterior of the B cell are involved in the binding of specific pathogen epitopes to initiate the activation process. It is estimated that each naïve mature B cell has upwards of 100,000 BCRs on its membrane, and each of these BCRs has an identical epitope-binding specificity.

In order to be prepared to react to a wide range of microbial epitopes, B cells, like T cells, use  **genetic rearrangement** of hundreds of gene segments to provide the necessary diversity of receptor specificities. The variable region of the  **BCR** heavy chain is made up of  **V, D, and J segments**, similar to the β chain of the TCR. The variable region of the BCR light chain is made up of V and J segments, similar to the α chain of the TCR. Genetic rearrangement of all possible combinations of V-J-D (heavy chain) and V-J (light chain) provides for millions of unique antigen-binding sites for the BCR and for the antibodies secreted after activation.

One important difference between BCRs and TCRs is the way they can interact with antigenic epitopes. Whereas TCRs can only interact with antigenic epitopes that are presented within the antigen-binding cleft of  **MHC I** or  **MHC II**, BCRs do not require antigen presentation with MHC; they can interact with epitopes on free antigens or with  **epitopes** displayed on the surface of intact pathogens. Another important difference is that TCRs only recognize protein epitopes, whereas BCRs can recognize epitopes associated with different molecular classes (e.g., proteins, polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides).

Activation of B cells occurs through different mechanisms depending on the molecular class of the antigen. Activation of a B cell by a protein antigen requires the B cell to function as an APC, presenting the protein epitopes with MHC II to helper T cells. Because of their dependence on T cells for  **activation of B cells**, protein antigens are classified as  **T-dependent antigens**. In contrast, polysaccharides, lipopolysaccharides, and other nonprotein antigens are considered  **T-independent antigens** because they can activate B cells without antigen processing and presentation to T cells.


{image:'Figure_18_4_BCR}
        

## T Cell-Independent Activation of B cells

Activation of B cells without the cooperation of helper T cells is referred to as  **T cell-independent activation** and occurs when BCRs interact with T-independent antigens. T-independent antigens (e.g., polysaccharide capsules, lipopolysaccharide) have  **repetitive epitope units** within their structure, and this repetition allows for the  **cross-linkage** of multiple BCRs, providing the first signal for activation ({'Figure_18_4_indact Figure 18.4.indact}). Because T cells are not involved, the second signal has to come from other sources, such as interactions of  **toll-like receptors** with  **PAMPs** or interactions with factors from the  **complement system**.

Once a B cell is activated, it undergoes  **clonal proliferation** and daughter cells differentiate into plasma cells.  **Plasma cells** are antibody factories that secrete large quantities of antibodies. After differentiation, the surface BCRs disappear and the plasma cell secretes  **pentameric IgM** molecules that have the same antigen specificity as the BCRs ({'Figure_18_4_indact Figure 18.4.indact}).

The T cell-independent response is short-lived and does not result in the production of  **memory B cells**. Thus it will not result in a secondary response to subsequent exposures to T-independent antigens.


{image:'Figure_18_4_indact}
        

## T Cell-Dependent Activation of B cells

T cell-dependent activation of B cells is more complex than T cell-independent activation, but the resulting immune response is stronger and develops memory. T cell-dependent activation can occur either in response to  **free protein antigens** or to protein antigens associated with an intact pathogen. Interaction between the BCRs on a naïve mature B cell and a free protein antigen stimulate  **internalization** of the antigen, whereas interaction with antigens associated with an intact pathogen initiates the extraction of the antigen from the pathogen before internalization. Once internalized inside the B cell, the protein antigen is processed and presented with  **MHC II**. The presented antigen is then recognized by  **helper T cells** specific to the same antigen. The TCR of the helper T cell recognizes the foreign antigen, and the T cell’s  **CD4** molecule interacts with MHC II on the B cell. The coordination between B cells and helper T cells that are specific to the same antigen is referred to as  **linked recognition**.

Once activated by linked recognition,  **TH2 cells** produce and secrete  **cytokines** that activate the B cell and cause proliferation into clonal daughter cells. After several rounds of proliferation, additional cytokines provided by the T<sub>H</sub>2 cells stimulate the differentiation of activated B cell clones into  **memory B cells**, which will quickly respond to subsequent exposures to the same protein epitope, and plasma cells that lose their membrane BCRs and initially secrete pentameric IgM ({'Figure_18_4_BCellact Figure 18.4.BCellact}).

After initial secretion of IgM,  **cytokines** secreted by T<sub>H</sub>2 cells stimulate the plasma cells to switch from IgM production to production of  **IgG**,  **IgA**, or  **IgE**. This process, called  **class switching** or  **isotype switching**, allows  **plasma cells** cloned from the same activated B cell to produce a variety of antibody classes with the same epitope specificity. Class switching is accomplished by  **genetic rearrangement** of gene segments encoding the  **constant region**, which determines an antibody’s class. The  **variable region** is not changed, so the new class of antibody retains the original epitope specificity.


{image:'Figure_18_4_BCellact}
        
