index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **B lymphocytes** or  **B cells** produce antibodies involved in humoral immunity. B cells are produced in the bone marrow, where the initial stages of maturation occur, and travel to the spleen for final steps of maturation into naïve mature B cells.
  *  **B-cell receptors (BCRs)** are membrane-bound monomeric forms of IgD and IgM that bind specific antigen epitopes with their Fab antigen-binding regions. Diversity of antigen binding specificity is created by genetic rearrangement of V, D, and J segments similar to the mechanism used for TCR diversity.
  * Protein antigens are called  **T-dependent antigens** because they can only activate B cells with the cooperation of helper T cells. Other molecule classes do not require T cell cooperation and are called  **T-independent antigens**.
  *  **T cell-independent activation** of B cells involves cross-linkage of BCRs by repetitive nonprotein antigen epitopes. It is characterized by the production of IgM by  **plasma cells** and does not produce memory B cells.
  *  **T cell-dependent activation** of B cells involves processing and presentation of protein antigens to helper T cells, activation of the B cells by cytokines secreted from activated T<sub>H</sub>2 cells, and plasma cells that produce different classes of antibodies as a result of  **class switching**.  **Memory B cells** are also produced.
  * Secondary exposures to T-dependent antigens result in a secondary antibody response initiated by memory B cells. The secondary response develops more quickly and produces higher and more sustained levels of antibody with higher affinity for the specific antigen.
