index: hide
name: Oversight of Gene Therapy

Presently, there is significant oversight of gene therapy clinical trials. At the federal level, three agencies regulate gene therapy in parallel: the  **Food and Drug Administration** (FDA), the  **Office of Human Research Protection** (OHRP), and the  **Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee** (RAC) at the  **National Institutes of Health** (NIH). Along with several local agencies, these federal agencies interact with the institutional review board to ensure that protocols are in place to protect patient safety during clinical trials. Compliance with these protocols is enforced mostly on the local level in cooperation with the federal agencies. Gene therapies are currently under the most extensive federal and local review compared to other types of therapies, which are more typically only under the review of the FDA. Some researchers believe that these extensive regulations actually inhibit progress in gene therapy research. In 2013, the  **Institute of Medicine** (now the  **National Academy of Medicine**) called upon the NIH to relax its review of gene therapy trials in most cases. However, ensuring patient safety continues to be of utmost concern.

## Ethical Concerns

Beyond the health risks of gene therapy, the ability to genetically modify humans poses a number of ethical issues related to the limits of such “therapy.” While current research is focused on gene therapy for genetic diseases, scientists might one day apply these methods to manipulate other genetic traits not perceived as desirable. This raises questions such as:

  * Which genetic traits are worthy of being “corrected”?
  * Should gene therapy be used for cosmetic reasons or to enhance human abilities?
  * Should genetic manipulation be used to impart desirable traits to the unborn?
  * Is everyone entitled to gene therapy, or could the cost of gene therapy create new forms of social inequality?
  * Who should be responsible for regulating and policing inappropriate use of gene therapies?

The ability to alter reproductive cells using gene therapy could also generate new ethical dilemmas. To date, the various types of gene therapies have been targeted to somatic cells, the non-reproductive cells within the body. Because somatic cell traits are not inherited, any genetic changes accomplished by  **somatic-cell gene therapy** would not be passed on to offspring. However, should scientists successfully introduce new genes to germ cells (eggs or sperm), the resulting traits could be passed on to offspring. This approach, called  **germ-line gene therapy**, could potentially be used to combat heritable diseases, but it could also lead to unintended consequences for future generations. Moreover, there is the question of informed consent, because those impacted by germ-line gene therapy are unborn and therefore unable to choose whether they receive the therapy. For these reasons, the U.S. government does not currently fund research projects investigating germ-line gene therapies in humans.
