index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 2.5.6.1
title: 2.5.6.1 - Surface Observations

{cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} reported that surface-observed total cloud cover may have increased over many land areas since the middle of the 20th century, including the USA, the former USSR, Western Europe, mid-latitude Canada and Australia. A few regions exhibited decreases, including China and central Europe. Trends were less globally consistent since the early 1970s, with regional reductions in cloud cover reported for western Asia and Europe but increases over the USA.

Analyses since AR4 have indicated decreases in cloud occurrence/cover in recent decades over Poland ({cite.2.'Wibig_2008}), China and the Tibetan Plateau ({cite.2.'Duan_and_Wu_2006}; {cite.2.'Endo_and_Yasunari_2006}; {cite.2.'Xia_2010b}), in particular for upper level clouds ({cite.2.'Warren_et_al_2007}) and also over Africa, Eurasia and in particular South America ({cite.2.'Warren_et_al_2007}). Increased frequency of overcast conditions has been reported for some regions, such as Canada, from 1953 to 2002 ({cite.2.'Milewska_2004}), with no statistically significant trends evident over Australia ({cite.2.'Jovanovic_et_al_2011}) and North America ({cite.2.'Warren_et_al_2007}). A global analysis of surface observations spanning the period 1971–2009 ({cite.2.'Eastman_and_Warren_2012}) indicates a small decline in total cloud cover of about 0.4% per decade which is largely {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to declining midand high-level cloud cover and is most prominent in the middle latitudes.

Regional variability in surface-observed cloudiness over the ocean appeared more credible than zonal and global mean variations in AR4. Multidecadal changes in upper-level cloud cover and total cloud cover over particular areas of the tropical Indo-Pacific Ocean were consistent with island precipitation records and {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} variability. This has been extended more recently by {cite.2.'Deser_et_al_2010a Deser et al. (2010a)}, who found that an eastward shift in tropical {Glossary.*Convection convection} and total cloud cover from the western to central equatorial Pacific occurred over the 20th century and attributed it to a long-term weakening of the Walker circulation ({Chapters.2.2_7.2_7_5 Section 2.7.5}). {cite.2.'Eastman_et_al_2011 Eastman et al. (2011)} report that, after the removal of apparently spurious globally coherent variability, cloud cover decreased in all subtropical stratocumulus regions from 1954 to 2008.
