index: hide
name: Lipid Catabolism

Triglycerides are a form of long-term energy storage in animals. They are made of  **glycerol** and three  **fatty acids** (see {'Figure_7_3_trygly Figure 7.3.trygly}). Phospholipids compose the cell and organelle membranes of all organisms except the archaea. Phospholipid structure is similar to  **triglycerides** except that one of the fatty acids is replaced by a phosphorylated head group (see {'Figure_7_3_phospholip Figure 7.3.phospholip}). Triglycerides and  **phospholipids** are broken down first by releasing fatty acid chains (and/or the phosphorylated head group, in the case of phospholipids) from the three-carbon glycerol backbone. The reactions breaking down triglycerides are catalyzed by  **lipases** and those involving phospholipids are catalyzed by  **phospholipases**. These enzymes contribute to the virulence of certain microbes, such as the bacterium  **Staphylococcus aureus** and the fungus  **Cryptococcus neoformans**. These microbes use phospholipases to destroy lipids and phospholipids in host cells and then use the catabolic products for energy (see <link:>).

The resulting products of lipid catabolism, glycerol and fatty acids, can be further degraded. Glycerol can be phosphorylated to glycerol-3-phosphate and easily converted to glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate, which continues through glycolysis. The released fatty acids are catabolized in a process called  **β-oxidation**, which sequentially removes two-carbon acetyl groups from the ends of fatty acid chains, reducing NAD<sup>+</sup> and FAD to produce NADH and FADH<sub>2</sub>, respectively, whose electrons can be used to make ATP by oxidative phosphorylation. The acetyl groups produced during β-oxidation are carried by coenzyme A to the Krebs cycle, and their movement through this cycle results in their degradation to CO<sub>2</sub>, producing ATP by substrate-level phosphorylation and additional NADH and FADH<sub>2</sub> molecules (see <link:> for a detailed illustration of β-oxidation).

Other types of lipids can also be degraded by certain microbes. For example, the ability of certain pathogens, like  **Mycobacterium tuberculosis**, to degrade cholesterol contributes to their virulence. The side chains of cholesterol can be easily removed enzymatically, but degradation of the remaining fused rings is more problematic. The four fused rings are sequentially broken in a multistep process facilitated by specific enzymes, and the resulting products, including pyruvate, can be further catabolized in the Krebs cycle.
