index: hide
name: Laminar Flow and Viscosity

When you pour yourself a glass of juice, the liquid flows freely and quickly. But when you pour syrup on your pancakes, that liquid flows slowly and sticks to the pitcher. The difference is fluid friction, both within the fluid itself and between the fluid and its surroundings. We call this property of fluids  *viscosity*. Juice has low viscosity, whereas syrup has high viscosity. In the previous sections we have considered ideal fluids with little or no viscosity. In this section, we will investigate what factors, including viscosity, affect the rate of fluid flow.

The precise definition of viscosity is based on  *laminar*, or nonturbulent, flow. Before we can define viscosity, then, we need to define laminar flow and turbulent flow. {'Figure_13_4_1a Figure 13.4.1a} shows both types of flow.  **Laminar** flow is characterized by the smooth flow of the fluid in layers that do not mix. Turbulent flow, or  **turbulence**, is characterized by eddies and swirls that mix layers of fluid together.


{image:'Figure_13_4_1a}
        

{'Figure_13_4_2a Figure 13.4.2a} shows schematically how laminar and turbulent flow differ. Layers flow without mixing when flow is laminar. When there is turbulence, the layers mix, and there are significant velocities in directions other than the overall direction of flow. The lines that are shown in many illustrations are the paths followed by small volumes of fluids. These are called  *streamlines*. Streamlines are smooth and continuous when flow is laminar, but break up and mix when flow is turbulent. Turbulence has two main causes. First, any obstruction or sharp corner, such as in a faucet, creates turbulence by imparting velocities perpendicular to the flow. Second, high speeds cause turbulence. The drag both between adjacent layers of fluid and between the fluid and its surroundings forms swirls and eddies, if the speed is great enough. We shall concentrate on laminar flow for the remainder of this section, leaving certain aspects of turbulence for later sections.


{image:'Figure_13_4_2a}
        

{'Figure_13_4_3a Figure 13.4.3a} shows how viscosity is measured for a fluid. Two parallel plates have the specific fluid between them. The bottom plate is held fixed, while the top plate is moved to the right, dragging fluid with it. The layer (or lamina) of fluid in contact with either plate does not move relative to the plate, and so the top layer moves at  *v size 12&#123;v&#125; &#123;&#125;* while the bottom layer remains at rest. Each successive layer from the top down exerts a force on the one below it, trying to drag it along, producing a continuous variation in speed from  *v size 12&#123;v&#125; &#123;&#125;* to 0 as shown. Care is taken to insure that the flow is laminar; that is, the layers do not mix. The motion in {'Figure_13_4_3a Figure 13.4.3a} is like a continuous shearing motion. Fluids have zero shear strength, but the  *rate* at which they are sheared is related to the same geometrical factors  *A size 12&#123;A&#125; &#123;&#125;* and  *L size 12&#123;L&#125; &#123;&#125;* as is shear deformation for solids.


{image:'Figure_13_4_3a}
        

A force  *F size 12&#123;F&#125; &#123;&#125;* is required to keep the top plate in {'Figure_13_4_3a Figure 13.4.3a} moving at a constant velocity  *v size 12&#123;v&#125; &#123;&#125;*, and experiments have shown that this force depends on four factors. First,  *F size 12&#123;F&#125; &#123;&#125;* is directly proportional to  *v size 12&#123;v&#125; &#123;&#125;* (until the speed is so high that turbulence occurs—then a much larger force is needed, and it has a more complicated dependence on  *v size 12&#123;v&#125; &#123;&#125;*). Second,  *F size 12&#123;F&#125; &#123;&#125;* is proportional to the area  *A size 12&#123;A&#125; &#123;&#125;* of the plate. This relationship seems reasonable, since  *A size 12&#123;A&#125; &#123;&#125;* is directly proportional to the amount of fluid being moved. Third,  *F size 12&#123;F&#125; &#123;&#125;* is inversely proportional to the distance between the plates  *L size 12&#123;L&#125; &#123;&#125;*. This relationship is also reasonable;  *L size 12&#123;L&#125; &#123;&#125;* is like a lever arm, and the greater the lever arm, the less force that is needed. Fourth,  *F size 12&#123;F&#125; &#123;&#125;* is directly proportional to  *the coefficient of viscosity*,  *η size 12&#123;η&#125; &#123;&#125;*. The greater the viscosity, the greater the force required. These dependencies are combined into the equation

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mrow><mrow><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo stretchy="false">=</mo></mrow><mi>η</mi><mfrac><mstyle fontstyle="italic"><mrow><mtext>vA</mtext></mrow></mstyle><mi>L</mi></mfrac></mrow></mrow><mtext>,</mtext></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;F=η &#123;  &#123; ital &quot;vA&quot;&#125;  over  &#123;L&#125; &#125; &#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>

which gives us a working definition of fluid  **viscosity** **** *η size 12&#123;η&#125; &#123;&#125;*. **** Solving for  *η size 12&#123;η&#125; &#123;&#125;* gives

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mrow><mrow><mrow><mi>η</mi><mo stretchy="false">=</mo></mrow><mfrac><mstyle fontstyle="italic"><mrow><mtext>FL</mtext></mrow></mstyle><mstyle fontstyle="italic"><mrow><mtext>vA</mtext></mrow></mstyle></mfrac></mrow></mrow><mtext>,</mtext></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;F=η &#123;  &#123; ital &quot;FL&quot;&#125;  over  &#123; ital &quot;vA&quot;&#125; &#125; &#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>

which defines viscosity in terms of how it is measured. The SI unit of viscosity is <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mrow><mrow><mtext>N</mtext><mo stretchy="false">⋅</mo><mtext>m/</mtext></mrow><mo stretchy="false">[</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mtext>m/s</mtext><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><msup><mtext>m</mtext><mrow><mn>2</mn></mrow></msup><mrow><mo stretchy="false">]</mo><mo stretchy="false">=</mo><mo stretchy="false">(</mo></mrow><msup><mtext>N/m</mtext><mrow><mn>2</mn></mrow></msup><mo stretchy="false">)</mo><mrow><mtext>s or Pa</mtext><mo stretchy="false">⋅</mo><mtext>s</mtext></mrow></mrow></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;N cdot &quot;m/&quot; \[  \( &quot;m/s&quot; \) m rSup &#123; size 8&#123;2&#125; &#125;  \] = \( &quot;N/m&quot; rSup &#123; size 8&#123;2&#125; &#125;  \) &quot;sorPa&quot; cdot s&#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>.  lists the coefficients of viscosity for various fluids.

Viscosity varies from one fluid to another by several orders of magnitude. As you might expect, the viscosities of gases are much less than those of liquids, and these viscosities are often temperature dependent. The viscosity of blood can be reduced by aspirin consumption, allowing it to flow more easily around the body. (When used over the long term in low doses, aspirin can help prevent heart attacks, and reduce the risk of blood clotting.)
