index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Malaria** is a protozoan parasite that remains an important cause of death primarily in the tropics. Several species in the genus  *Plasmodium* are responsible for malaria and all are transmitted by  *Anopheles* mosquitoes.  *Plasmodium* infects and destroys human red blood cells, leading to organ damage, anemia, blood vessel necrosis, and death. Malaria can be treated with various antimalarial drugs and prevented through vector control.
  *  **Toxoplasmosis** is a widespread protozoal infection that can cause serious infections in the immunocompromised and in developing fetuses. Domestic cats are the definitive host.
  * Babesiosis is a generally asymptomatic infection of red blood cells that can causes malaria-like symptoms in elderly, immunocompromised, or asplenic patients.
  *  **Chagas disease** is a tropical disease transmitted by triatomine bugs. The trypanosome infects heart, neural tissues, monocytes, and phagocytes, often remaining latent for many years before causing serious and sometimes fatal damage to the digestive system and heart.
  *  **Leishmaniasis** is caused by the protozoan  *Leishmania* and is transmitted by sand flies. Symptoms are generally mild, but serious cases may cause organ damage, anemia, and loss of immune competence.
  *  **Schistosomiasis** is caused by a fluke transmitted by snails. The fluke moves throughout the body in the blood stream and chronically infects various tissues, leading to organ damage.
