index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.5.5.7
title: 12.5.5.7 - Sea Ice

Several studies based on observational data or model hindcasts suggest that the rapidly declining summer Arctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} cover might reach or might already have passed a {Glossary.*Tipping_point tipping point} ({cite.12.'Lindsay_and_Zhang_2005}; {cite.12.'Wadhams_2012}; {cite.12.'Livina_and_Lenton_2013}). Identifying Arctic sea ice tipping points from the short observational record is difficult due to high interannual and decadal variability. In some climate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}, the decrease in summer Arctic sea ice areal coverage is not gradual but is instead punctuated by 5to10year periods of strong ice loss ({cite.12.'Holland_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Vavrus_et_al_2012}; Döscher and Koenigk, 2013). Still, these abrupt reductions do not necessarily require the existence of a tipping point in the system or further imply an irreversible behaviour ({cite.12.'Amstrup_et_al_2010}; {cite.12.'Lenton_2012}). The 5to 10-year events discussed by {cite.12.'Holland_et_al_2006 Holland et al. (2006)} arise when large natural {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} in the Arctic reinforces the anthropogenically-forced change ({cite.12.'Holland_et_al_2008}). Positive trends on the same time scale also occur when internal variability counteracts the forced change until the middle of the 21st century ({cite.12.'Holland_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Kay_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Vavrus_et_al_2012}).

Further work using single-column energy-balance models ({cite.12.'Merryfield_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Eisenman_and_Wettlaufer_2009}; {cite.12.'Abbot_et_al_2011}) yielded mixed results about the possibility of tipping points and bifurcations in the transition from perennial to seasonal sea ice cover. Thin ice and snow covers promote strong longwave radiative loss to space and high ice growth rates (e.g., {cite.12.'Bitz_and_Roe_2004}; {cite.12.'Notz_2009}; {cite.12.'Eisenman_2012}). These stabilizing negative feedbacks can be large enough to overcome the positive surface–{Glossary.*Albedo albedo} {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} and/or {Glossary.*Cloud_feedback cloud feedback}, which act to amplify the forced sea ice response. In such low-order models, the emergence of multiple stable states with increased climate {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} is a parameter-dependent feature ({cite.12.'Abbot_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Eisenman_2012}). For example, {cite.12.'Eisenman_2012 Eisenman (2012)} showed with a single-column energy-balance model that certain parameter choices that cause thicker ice or warmer ocean under a given climate forcing make the model more prone to bifurcations and hence irreversible behaviour.

The reversibility of sea ice loss with respect to global or hemispheric mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} change has been directly assessed in {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs}/{Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} by first raising the {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} concentration until virtually all sea ice disappears year-round and then lowering the CO2 level at the same rate as during the ramp-up phase until it reaches again the initial value ({cite.12.'Armour_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Boucher_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Ridley_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Li_et_al_2013b}). None of these studies show evidence of a bifurcation leading to irreversible changes in Arctic sea ice. AOGCMs have also been used to test summer Arctic sea ice recovery after either sudden or very rapid artificial removal, and all had sea ice return within a few years (Schröder and Connolley, 2007; Sedláček et al., 2011; {cite.12.'Tietsche_et_al_2011}). In the Antarctic, as a result of the strong coupling between the Southern Ocean’s surface and the deep ocean, the sea ice areal coverage in some of the models integrated with ramp-up and ramp-down atmospheric CO2 concentration exhibits a significant lag relative to the global or hemispheric mean {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} ({cite.12.'Ridley_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Li_et_al_2013b}), so that its changes may be considered irreversible on centennial time scales.

Diagnostic analyses of a few global {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} have shown abrupt sea ice losses in the transition from seasonal to year-round Arctic icefree conditions after raising CO2 to very high levels ({cite.12.'Winton_2006b}; {cite.12.'Ridley_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Li_et_al_2013b}), but without evidence for irreversible changes. Winton (2006b, 2008) hypothesized that the small ice cap instability ({cite.12.'North_1984}) could cause such an abrupt transition. With a low-order Arctic sea ice model, {cite.12.'Eisenman_and_Wettlaufer_2009 Eisenman and Wettlaufer (2009)} also found an abrupt change behaviour in the transition from seasonal ice to year-round ice-free conditions, accompanied by an irreversible bifurcation to a new stable, annually ice-free state. They concluded that the cause is a loss of the stabilizing effect of sea ice growth when the ice season shrinks in time. The Arctic sea ice may thus experience a sharp transition to annually ice-free conditions, but the irreversible nature of this transition seems to depend on the model complexity and structure.

In conclusion, rapid summer Arctic sea ice losses are likely to occur in the transition to seasonally ice-free conditions. These abrupt changes might have consequences throughout the climate system as noted by {cite.12.'Vavrus_et_al_2011 Vavrus et al. (2011)} for cloud cover and {cite.12.'Lawrence_et_al_2008b Lawrence et al. (2008b)} for the high-latitude ground state. Furthermore, the interannual-to-decadal variability in the summer Arctic sea ice extent is projected to increase in response to global warming ({cite.12.'Holland_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Goosse_et_al_2009}). These studies suggest that large anomalies in Arctic sea ice areal coverage, like the ones that occurred in 2007 and 2012, might become increasingly frequent. However, there is little evidence in global climate models of a tipping point (or critical threshold) in the transition from a perennially ice-covered to a seasonally ice-free Arctic Ocean beyond which further sea ice loss is unstoppable and irreversible.
