index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.4.3.3
title: 13.4.3.3 - Possible Irreversibility of Greenland Ice Loss and Associated Temperature Threshold

A number of model results agree in showing that the Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet}, like other climatic subsystems ({cite.13.'Lenton_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Levermann_et_al_2012}) (see {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_5 Section 12.5.5}), exhibits a strongly nonlinear and potentially irreversible response to surface warming. The mechanism of this threshold behaviour is the SMB-height {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 Section 13.4.3.2}); that is, as the surface is lowered due to ice loss, the associated warming of the near surface increases ablation, leading to further ice loss. This feedback is small but not negligible in the 21st century ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 Section 13.4.3.2}) and becomes important for {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} for the 22nd century (Goelzer et al. 2013) and beyond. This nonlinear behaviour may be accelerated by a reduced surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} caused by surface melting which tends to further decrease the surface mass balance ({cite.13.'Box_et_al_2012}) ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_1 Section 13.4.3.1}).

Although the mean SMB of the Greenland ice sheet is positive, in a steady state it must be balanced by ice outflow, so the ice sheet must extend to the coast. In a warmer climate, the mean SMB is reduced ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_1 Section 13.4.3.1}) and the steady-state ice sheet will have a lower surface and volume. Models show a threshold in surface warming beyond which self-amplifying feedbacks result in a partial or near-complete ice loss on Greenland ({cite.13.'Greve_2000}; {cite.13.'Driesschaert_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Charbit_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Ridley_et_al_2010}; {cite.13.'Robinson_et_al_2012}). If a temperature above this threshold is maintained over a multi-millennial time period, the majority of the Greenland ice sheet will be lost by changes in SMB on a millennial to multi-millennial time scale (equivalent to a {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} rise of about 7 m; {'Table_4_1 Table 4.1}). During the Middle {Glossary.*Pliocene Pliocene} warm intervals, when global mean temperature was 2°C to 3.5°C higher than pre-industrial, ice-sheet models suggest near-complete {Glossary.*Deglaciation_glacial_termination deglaciation} of Greenland ({cite.13.'Hill_et_al_2010}).

A simplifying assumption is that the threshold is the warming required with the current ice-sheet topography to reduce the mean SMB to zero, on the argument that the ice sheet margin must then retreat from the coast. Using this criterion, {cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006 Gregory and Huybrechts (2006)} estimated that the SMB threshold occurs for a GMST increase of 3.1 [1.9 to 4.6] °C (4.5 [3.0 to 6.0] °C for Greenland {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}) above pre-industrial (assumed to be a steady state). More recent studies have found thresholds below or in the lower part of this range. In a coupled ice sheet–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} of intermediate complexity, {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)} found this threshold at 2.5°C for annual average Greenland SAT. Comparing three {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} models, {cite.13.'Rae_et_al_2012 Rae et al. (2012)} found a strong dependence of the threshold on the model formulation of the SMB. Based on the model’s performance against observations and the physical detail of its surface scheme, MAR is considered the most realistic model, and yields a threshold value 2.8 [2.1 to 3.4] °C for changes in Greenland annual average temperature compared to pre-industrial. Using MAR driven with output from various CMIP5 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs}, {cite.13.'Fettweis_et_al_2013 Fettweis et al. (2013)} evaluated the threshold as ~3°C in GMST above 1980– 1999 (hence about 3.5°C relative to pre-industrial), and found that it is not exceeded in the 21st century under the RCP4.5 scenario but is reached around 2070 under the {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} scenario.

Some of the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in the threshold results from the value assumed for the steady state ice-sheet SMB (see {'Table_13_2 Table 13.2}), and whether this is assumed to be pre-industrial or a more recent period. For 400 Gt yr–1 ({cite.13.'Fettweis_et_al_2013}), the parametrization of Greenland ice sheet SMB used for present assessment of 21st century changes ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_1 Section 13.4.3.1}, Supplementary Material) gives a global warming threshold of 3.0 [2.1 to 4.1] °C with respect to 1860−1879 (the reference period used in {Box_13_1 Box 13.1}); for 225 Gt yr–1 ({cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006}, following {cite.13.'Church_et_al_2001}), the threshold is 2.1 [1.5 to 3.0] °C.

Although a negative SMB is a sufficient condition for passing the threshold, it will overestimate the value of the threshold quantitatively, because the SMB–height feedback (even without passing the threshold) means that the steady-state SMB is reduced by more than is calculated assuming fixed topography. The actual SMB change will depend on the dynamical response of the ice sheet that determines its topography. Constraining simulations with a dynamic ice-sheet model to changes during the last interglacial, {cite.13.'Robinson_et_al_2012 Robinson et al. (2012)} estimated the threshold as 1.6 [0.9 to 2.8] °C global averaged temperature above pre-industrial. In these simulations, they find that the threshold is passed when southeastern Greenland has a negative SMB. The near-complete ice loss then occurs through ice flow and SMB.

The complete loss of the ice sheet is not inevitable because it has a long time scale (tens of millennia near the threshold and a millennium or more for temperatures a few degrees above the threshold). If the surrounding temperatures decline before the ice sheet is eliminated, the ice sheet might regrow. In the context of future GHG {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, the time scale of ice loss is competing with the time scale of temperature decline after a reduction of GHG emissions ({cite.13.'Allen_et_al_2009}; {cite.13.'Solomon_et_al_2009}; {cite.13.'Zickfeld_et_al_2009}). The outcome therefore depends on both the {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} concentration and on how long it is sustained. {cite.13.'Charbit_et_al_2008 Charbit et al. (2008)} found that loss of the ice sheet is inevitable for cumulative emissions above about 3000 GtC, but a partial loss followed by regrowth occurs for cumulative emissions less than 2500 GtC. {cite.13.'Ridley_et_al_2010 Ridley et al. (2010)} identified three steady states of the ice sheet. If the CO2 concentration is returned to pre-industrial when more than 20 to 40% of the ice sheet has been lost, it will regrow only to 80% of its original volume due to a local {Glossary.*Climate_feedback climate feedback} in one region; if 50% or more, it regrows to 20 to 40% of the original. Similar states with ice volume around 20%, 60 to 80% and 100% of the initial ice volume are also found in other models ({cite.13.'Langen_et_al_2012}; {cite.13.'Robinson_et_al_2012}). If all the ice is lost, temperatures must decline to below a critical threshold for regrowth of the ice sheet ({cite.13.'Robinson_et_al_2012}; {cite.13.'Solgaard_and_Langen_2012}).

On the evidence of paleo data and modelling (Sections {Chapters.5.5_6.5_6_2.5_6_2_3 5.6.2.3} {Chapters.13.13_2.13_2_1 13.2.1}), it is likely that during the {Glossary.*Last_Interglacial LIG}, when global mean temperature never exceeded 2oC pre-industrial, the Greenland ice sheet contributed no more than ~4 m to GMSL. This could indicate that the threshold for near-complete deglaciation had not been passed, or that it was not greatly exceeded so that the rate of mass loss was low; however, the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} responsible for the LIG warming was orbital rather than from CO2 (van de Berg et al., 2011), so it is not a direct analogue and the applicable threshold may be different. Studies with fixed-topography ice sheets indicate a threshold of 2°C or above of global warming with respect to pre-industrial for near-complete loss of the Greenland ice sheet, while the one study (and therefore low confidence) presently available with a dynamical ice sheet suggests that the threshold could be as low as about 1°C (Robinson et al. 2012). Recent studies with fixed-topography ice sheets indicate that the threshold is less than about 4°C (medium confidence because of multiple studies). With currently available information, we do not have sufficient confidence to assign a likely range for the threshold. If the threshold is exceeded temporarily, an irreversible loss of part or most of the Greenland ice sheet could result, depending on the duration and amount that the threshold is exceeded.
