index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.5.4.2
title: 9.5.4.2 - Extreme Precipitation

For extreme precipitation, observational {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} is much larger than for temperature, making model evaluation more challenging. Discrepancies between different reanalyses for extreme precipitation are substantial, whereas station-based observations have limited spatial coverage ({cite.9.'Kharin_et_al_2007}, 2012; {cite.9.'Sillmann_et_al_2013}). Moreover, a station-based observational data set, which is interpolated from station measurements, has a potential mismatch of spatial scale when compared to model results or reanalyses ({cite.9.'Chen_and_Knutson_2008}). Uncertainties are especially large in the tropics. In the extratropics, precipitation extremes in terms of 20-year return values simulated by CMIP3 and CMIP5 models compared relatively well with the observational data sets, with typical discrepancies in the 20% range ({cite.9.'Kharin_et_al_2007}, 2012). {'Figure_9_37 Figure 9.37} shows relative errors of CMIP5 models for five precipitation-related indices. Darker grey shadings in the RMSE columns for precipitation indicate larger discrepancies between models and reanalyses for precipitation extremes in general. {cite.9.'Sillmann_et_al_2013 Sillmann et al. (2013)} found that the CMIP5 models tend to simulate more intense precipitation and fewer consecutive wet days than the CMIP3, and thus are closer to the observationally based indices.

It is known from sensitivity studies that simulated extreme precipitation is strongly dependent on model {Glossary.*Resolution resolution}. Growing evidence has shown that high-resolution models (50 km or finer in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}) can reproduce the observed intensity of extreme precipitation ({cite.9.'Wehner_et_al_2010}; {cite.9.'Endo_et_al_2012}; {cite.9.'Sakamoto_et_al_2012}), though some of these results are based on models with observationally constrained surface or lateral boundary conditions (i.e., Atmospheric General Circulation Models (AGCMs) or {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model Regional Climate Models} (RCMs)).

In terms of historical trends, a {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution detection} and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution} study by {cite.9.'Min_et_al_2011 Min et al. (2011)} found consistency in sign between the observed increase in heavy precipitation over NH land areas in the second half of the 20th century and that simulated by CMIP3 models, but they found that the models tend to underestimate the magnitude of the {Glossary.*Trend trend} (see also {Chapters.10 Chapter 10}). Related to this, it has been pointed out from comparisons to satellite-based data sets that the majority of models underestimate the sensitivity of extreme precipitation intensity to temperature in the tropics ({cite.9.'Allan_and_Soden_2008}; {cite.9.'Allan_et_al_2010}; O’Gorman, 2012) and globally ({cite.9.'Liu_et_al_2009}; {cite.9.'Shiu_et_al_2012}). O’Gorman (2012) showed that this implies possible underestimation of the {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} future increase in extreme precipitation in the tropics.
