index: hide
name: General Structure of a Vertebra

Within the different regions of the vertebral column, vertebrae vary in size and shape, but they all follow a similar structural pattern. A typical vertebra will consist of a body, a vertebral arch, and seven processes ({'Figure_7_3_4 Figure 7.3.4}).

The body is the anterior portion of each vertebra and is the part that supports the body weight. Because of this, the vertebral bodies progressively increase in size and thickness going down the vertebral column. The bodies of adjacent vertebrae are separated and strongly united by an intervertebral disc.

The  **vertebral arch** forms the posterior portion of each vertebra. It consists of four parts, the right and left pedicles and the right and left laminae. Each  **pedicle** forms one of the lateral sides of the vertebral arch. The pedicles are anchored to the posterior side of the vertebral body. Each  **lamina** forms part of the posterior roof of the vertebral arch. The large opening between the vertebral arch and body is the  **vertebral foramen**, which contains the spinal cord. In the intact vertebral column, the vertebral foramina of all of the vertebrae align to form the  **vertebral (spinal) canal**, which serves as the bony protection and passageway for the spinal cord down the back. When the vertebrae are aligned together in the vertebral column, notches in the margins of the pedicles of adjacent vertebrae together form an  **intervertebral foramen**, the opening through which a spinal nerve exits from the vertebral column ({'Figure_7_3_5 Figure 7.3.5}).

Seven processes arise from the vertebral arch. Each paired  **transverse process** projects laterally and arises from the junction point between the pedicle and lamina. The single  **spinous process** (vertebral spine) projects posteriorly at the midline of the back. The vertebral spines can easily be felt as a series of bumps just under the skin down the middle of the back. The transverse and spinous processes serve as important muscle attachment sites. A  **superior articular process** extends or faces upward, and an  **inferior articular process** faces or projects downward on each side of a vertebrae. The paired superior articular processes of one vertebra join with the corresponding paired inferior articular processes from the next higher vertebra. These junctions form slightly moveable joints between the adjacent vertebrae. The shape and orientation of the articular processes vary in different regions of the vertebral column and play a major role in determining the type and range of motion available in each region.


{image:'Figure_7_3_4}
        


{image:'Figure_7_3_5}
        
