index: hide
name: Regional Modifications of Vertebrae

In addition to the general characteristics of a typical vertebra described above, vertebrae also display characteristic size and structural features that vary between the different vertebral column regions. Thus, cervical vertebrae are smaller than lumbar vertebrae due to differences in the proportion of body weight that each supports. Thoracic vertebrae have sites for rib attachment, and the vertebrae that give rise to the sacrum and coccyx have fused together into single bones.

## Cervical Vertebrae

Typical  **cervical vertebrae**, such as C4 or C5, have several characteristic features that differentiate them from thoracic or lumbar vertebrae ({'Figure_7_3_6 Figure 7.3.6}). Cervical vertebrae have a small body, reflecting the fact that they carry the least amount of body weight. Cervical vertebrae usually have a bifid (Y-shaped) spinous process. The spinous processes of the C3–C6 vertebrae are short, but the spine of C7 is much longer. You can find these vertebrae by running your finger down the midline of the posterior neck until you encounter the prominent C7 spine located at the base of the neck. The transverse processes of the cervical vertebrae are sharply curved (U-shaped) to allow for passage of the cervical spinal nerves. Each transverse process also has an opening called the  **transverse foramen**. An important artery that supplies the brain ascends up the neck by passing through these openings. The superior and inferior articular processes of the cervical vertebrae are flattened and largely face upward or downward, respectively.

The first and second cervical vertebrae are further modified, giving each a distinctive appearance. The first cervical (C1) vertebra is also called the  **atlas**, because this is the vertebra that supports the skull on top of the vertebral column (in Greek mythology, Atlas was the god who supported the heavens on his shoulders). The C1 vertebra does not have a body or spinous process. Instead, it is ring-shaped, consisting of an  **anterior arch** and a  **posterior arch**. The transverse processes of the atlas are longer and extend more laterally than do the transverse processes of any other cervical vertebrae. The superior articular processes face upward and are deeply curved for articulation with the occipital condyles on the base of the skull. The inferior articular processes are flat and face downward to join with the superior articular processes of the C2 vertebra.

The second cervical (C2) vertebra is called the  **axis**, because it serves as the axis for rotation when turning the head toward the right or left. The axis resembles typical cervical vertebrae in most respects, but is easily distinguished by the  **dens** (odontoid process), a bony projection that extends upward from the vertebral body. The dens joins with the inner aspect of the anterior arch of the atlas, where it is held in place by transverse ligament.


{image:'Figure_7_3_6}
        

## Thoracic Vertebrae

The bodies of the  **thoracic vertebrae** are larger than those of cervical vertebrae ({'Figure_7_3_7 Figure 7.3.7}). The characteristic feature for a typical midthoracic vertebra is the spinous process, which is long and has a pronounced downward angle that causes it to overlap the next inferior vertebra. The superior articular processes of thoracic vertebrae face anteriorly and the inferior processes face posteriorly. These orientations are important determinants for the type and range of movements available to the thoracic region of the vertebral column.

Thoracic vertebrae have several additional articulation sites, each of which is called a  **facet**, where a rib is attached. Most thoracic vertebrae have two facets located on the lateral sides of the body, each of which is called a  **costal facet** (costal = “rib”). These are for articulation with the head (end) of a rib. An additional facet is located on the transverse process for articulation with the tubercle of a rib.


{image:'Figure_7_3_7}
        


{image:'Figure_7_3_8}
        

## Lumbar Vertebrae

 **Lumbar vertebrae** carry the greatest amount of body weight and are thus characterized by the large size and thickness of the vertebral body ({'Figure_7_3_9 Figure 7.3.9}). They have short transverse processes and a short, blunt spinous process that projects posteriorly. The articular processes are large, with the superior process facing backward and the inferior facing forward.


{image:'Figure_7_3_9}
        

## Sacrum and Coccyx

The sacrum is a triangular-shaped bone that is thick and wide across its superior base where it is weight bearing and then tapers down to an inferior, non-weight bearing apex ({'Figure_7_3_10 Figure 7.3.10}). It is formed by the fusion of five sacral vertebrae, a process that does not begin until after the age of 20. On the anterior surface of the older adult sacrum, the lines of vertebral fusion can be seen as four transverse ridges. On the posterior surface, running down the midline, is the  **median sacral crest**, a bumpy ridge that is the remnant of the fused spinous processes (median = “midline”; while medial = “toward, but not necessarily at, the midline”). Similarly, the fused transverse processes of the sacral vertebrae form the  **lateral sacral crest**.

The  **sacral promontory** is the anterior lip of the superior base of the sacrum. Lateral to this is the roughened auricular surface, which joins with the ilium portion of the hipbone to form the immobile sacroiliac joints of the pelvis. Passing inferiorly through the sacrum is a bony tunnel called the  **sacral canal**, which terminates at the  **sacral hiatus** near the inferior tip of the sacrum. The anterior and posterior surfaces of the sacrum have a series of paired openings called  **sacral foramina** (singular = foramen) that connect to the sacral canal. Each of these openings is called a  **posterior (dorsal) sacral foramen** or  **anterior (ventral) sacral foramen**. These openings allow for the anterior and posterior branches of the sacral spinal nerves to exit the sacrum. The  **superior articular process of the sacrum**, one of which is found on either side of the superior opening of the sacral canal, articulates with the inferior articular processes from the L5 vertebra.

The coccyx, or tailbone, is derived from the fusion of four very small coccygeal vertebrae (see {'Figure_7_3_10 Figure 7.3.10}). It articulates with the inferior tip of the sacrum. It is not weight bearing in the standing position, but may receive some body weight when sitting.


{image:'Figure_7_3_10}
        
