index: hide
name: Endospore Staining

Endospores are structures produced within certain bacterial cells that allow them to survive harsh conditions. Gram staining alone cannot be used to visualize endospores, which appear clear when Gram-stained cells are viewed.  **Endospore staining** uses two stains to differentiate  **endospores** from the rest of the cell. The  **Schaeffer-Fulton method** (the most commonly used endospore-staining technique) uses heat to push the primary stain ( **malachite green**) into the endospore. Washing with water decolorizes the cell, but the endospore retains the green stain. The cell is then counterstained pink with  **safranin**. The resulting image reveals the shape and location of endospores, if they are present. The green endospores will appear either within the pink vegetative cells or as separate from the pink cells altogether. If no endospores are present, then only the pink vegetative cells will be visible ({'Figure_2_4_Endospores Figure 2.4.Endospores}).


{image:'Figure_2_4_Endospores}
        

Endospore-staining techniques are important for identifying  *Bacillus* and  *Clostridium*, two genera of endospore-producing bacteria that contain clinically significant species. Among others,  **B. anthracis** (which causes  **anthrax**) has been of particular interest because of concern that its spores could be used as a bioterrorism agent.  **C. difficile** is a particularly important species responsible for the typically hospital-acquired infection known as “C. diff.”
