index: hide
name: Gram Staining

The  **Gram stain procedure** is a differential staining procedure that involves multiple steps. It was developed by Danish microbiologist Hans Christian  **Gram** in 1884 as an effective method to distinguish between bacteria with different types of cell walls, and even today it remains one of the most frequently used staining techniques. The steps of the Gram stain procedure are listed below and illustrated in {'Figure_2_4_GramProc Figure 2.4.GramProc}.

  1. First,  **crystal violet**, a  **primary stain**, is applied to a heat-fixed smear, giving all of the cells a purple color.
  2. Next,  **Gram’s iodine**, a  **mordant**, is added. A mordant is a substance used to set or stabilize stains or dyes; in this case, Gram’s iodine acts like a trapping agent that complexes with the crystal violet, making the crystal violet–iodine complex clump and stay contained in thick layers of peptidoglycan in the cell walls.
  3. Next, a  **decolorizing agent** is added, usually ethanol or an acetone/ethanol solution. Cells that have thick peptidoglycan layers in their cell walls are much less affected by the decolorizing agent; they generally retain the crystal violet dye and remain purple. However, the decolorizing agent more easily washes the dye out of cells with thinner peptidoglycan layers, making them again colorless.
  4. Finally, a secondary  **counterstain**, usually  **safranin**, is added. This stains the decolorized cells pink and is less noticeable in the cells that still contain the crystal violet dye.


{image:'Figure_2_4_GramProc}
        

The purple, crystal-violet stained cells are referred to as gram-positive cells, while the red, safranin-dyed cells are gram-negative ({'Figure_2_4_Gramstain Figure 2.4.Gramstain}). However, there are several important considerations in interpreting the results of a Gram stain. First, older bacterial cells may have damage to their cell walls that causes them to appear gram-negative even if the species is gram-positive. Thus, it is best to use fresh bacterial cultures for Gram staining. Second, errors such as leaving on decolorizer too long can affect the results. In some cases, most cells will appear gram-positive while a few appear gram-negative (as in {'Figure_2_4_Gramstain Figure 2.4.Gramstain}). This suggests damage to the individual cells or that decolorizer was left on for too long; the cells should still be classified as gram-positive if they are all the same species rather than a mixed culture.

Besides their differing interactions with dyes and decolorizing agents, the chemical differences between gram-positive and gram-negative cells have other implications with clinical relevance. For example, Gram staining can help clinicians classify bacterial pathogens in a sample into categories associated with specific properties. Gram-negative bacteria tend to be more resistant to certain antibiotics than gram-positive bacteria. We will discuss this and other applications of Gram staining in more detail in later chapters.


{image:'Figure_2_4_Gramstain}
        
