index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.6.6
title: 9.6.6 - Relating Downscaling Performance to Credibility of Regional Climate Information

A fundamental issue is how the performance of a {Glossary.*Downscaling downscaling} method relates to its ability to provide credible future {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} ({cite.9.'Raisanen_2007}). This subject is discussed further in {Chapters.9.9_8 Section 9.8}. The credibility of downscaled information of course depends on the quality of the downscaling method itself (e.g., {cite.9.'Dawson_et_al_2012}; Déqué et al., 2012; {cite.9.'Eum_et_al_2012}), and on the quality of the global {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} providing the large-scale boundary conditions (e.g., van Oldenborgh et al., 2009; {cite.9.'Diaconescu_and_Laprise_2013}).

Specific to SD is the statistical stationarity hypothesis, that is, that the relationships inferred from historical data remain valid under a changing climate ({cite.9.'Maraun_2012}). {cite.9.'Vecchi_et_al_2008 Vecchi et al. (2008)} note that a statistical method that captures interannual hurricane variability gives very different results for projections compared to {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model RCMs}. Such results suggest that good performance of statistical downscaling as assessed against observations does not guarantee credible {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} information. Some recent studies have proposed ways to evaluate SD approaches using RCM outputs (e.g., {cite.9.'Vrac_and_Naveau_2008}; {cite.9.'Driouech_et_al_2010}) or long series of observations (e.g. {cite.9.'Schmith_2008}).

{cite.9.'Giorgi_and_Coppola_2010 Giorgi and Coppola (2010)} argued that regional-scale climate projections over land in the CMIP3 models were not sensitive to their temperature biases. For precipitation, the same was found for about two thirds of the global land area. However, there is some recent evidence that regional biases may be nonlinear for {Topics.*Extreme_Events temperature extremes} ({cite.9.'Christensen_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Boberg_and_Christensen_2012}; {cite.9.'Christensen_and_Boberg_2013}) in both global and regional models. A mechanism at play may be that models tend to dry out the soil too effectively at high temperatures, which can lead to systematic biases in projected warm summertime conditions ({cite.9.'Christensen_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Kostopoulou_et_al_2009}). This is illustrated in {'Figure_9_41 Figure 9.41} for the Mediterranean region, which suggests a tendency in RCMs, CMIP3 and CMIP5 models towards an enhanced warm bias in the warmer months. The implication is that the typically large warming signal in these regions could be biased ({cite.9.'Boberg_and_Christensen_2012}; {cite.9.'Mearns_et_al_2012}). Findings such as these stress the importance of a thorough assessment of models’ biases when they are applied for projections (e.g., de Elia and Cote, 2010; {cite.9.'Boberg_and_Christensen_2012}; {cite.9.'Christensen_and_Boberg_2013}).

{image:'Figure_9_41}

Di Luca et al. (2012) analysed downscaled climate change projections from six RCMs run over North America. The climate change signals for seasonal precipitation and temperature were similar to those in the driving {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs}, and the spatial detail gained by downscaling was comparable in both present and future climate. Déqué et al. (2012) studied projections with several combinations of AOGCM and RCM for Europe. A larger part of the spread in winter temperature and precipitation projections was explained by the differences in global model boundary conditions, although much of the spread in projected summer precipitation was explained by RCM. This underlines the importance of both the quality of the boundary conditions and the downscaling method.
