index: hide
name: Nuclear Fuels

 **Nuclear fuel** consists of a fissionable isotope, such as uranium-235, which must be present in sufficient quantity to provide a self-sustaining chain reaction. In the United States, uranium ores contain from 0.05–0.3% of the uranium oxide U<sub>3</sub>O<sub>8</sub>; the uranium in the ore is about 99.3% nonfissionable U-238 with only 0.7% fissionable U-235. Nuclear reactors require a fuel with a higher concentration of U-235 than is found in nature; it is normally enriched to have about 5% of uranium mass as U-235. At this concentration, it is not possible to achieve the supercritical mass necessary for a nuclear explosion. Uranium can be enriched by gaseous diffusion (the only method currently used in the US), using a gas centrifuge, or by laser separation.

In the gaseous diffusion enrichment plant where U-235 fuel is prepared, UF<sub>6</sub> (uranium hexafluoride) gas at low pressure moves through barriers that have holes just barely large enough for UF<sub>6</sub> to pass through. The slightly lighter <sup>235</sup>UF<sub>6</sub> molecules diffuse through the barrier slightly faster than the heavier <sup>238</sup>UF<sub>6</sub> molecules. This process is repeated through hundreds of barriers, gradually increasing the concentration of <sup>235</sup>UF<sub>6</sub> to the level needed by the nuclear reactor. The basis for this process, Graham’s law, is described in the chapter on gases. The enriched UF<sub>6</sub> gas is collected, cooled until it solidifies, and then taken to a fabrication facility where it is made into fuel assemblies. Each fuel assembly consists of fuel rods that contain many thimble-sized, ceramic-encased, enriched uranium (usually UO<sub>2</sub>) fuel pellets. Modern nuclear reactors may contain as many as 10 million fuel pellets. The amount of energy in each of these pellets is equal to that in almost a ton of coal or 150 gallons of oil.
