index: hide
name: Blood Supply to the Brain

A lack of oxygen to the CNS can be devastating, and the cardiovascular system has specific regulatory reflexes to ensure that the blood supply is not interrupted. There are multiple routes for blood to get into the CNS, with specializations to protect that blood supply and to maximize the ability of the brain to get an uninterrupted perfusion.

## Arterial Supply

The major artery carrying recently oxygenated blood away from the heart is the aorta. The very first branches off the aorta supply the heart with nutrients and oxygen. The next branches give rise to the  **common carotid arteries**, which further branch into the  **internal carotid arteries**. The external carotid arteries supply blood to the tissues on the surface of the cranium. The bases of the common carotids contain stretch receptors that immediately respond to the drop in blood pressure upon standing. The  **orthostatic reflex** is a reaction to this change in body position, so that blood pressure is maintained against the increasing effect of gravity (orthostatic means “standing up”). Heart rate increases—a reflex of the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system—and this raises blood pressure.

The internal carotid artery enters the cranium through the  **carotid canal** in the temporal bone. A second set of vessels that supply the CNS are the  **vertebral arteries**, which are protected as they pass through the neck region by the transverse foramina of the cervical vertebrae. The vertebral arteries enter the cranium through the  **foramen magnum** of the occipital bone. Branches off the left and right vertebral arteries merge into the  **anterior spinal artery** supplying the anterior aspect of the spinal cord, found along the anterior median fissure. The two vertebral arteries then merge into the  **basilar artery**, which gives rise to branches to the brain stem and cerebellum. The left and right internal carotid arteries and branches of the basilar artery all become the  **circle of Willis**, a confluence of arteries that can maintain perfusion of the brain even if narrowing or a blockage limits flow through one part ({'Figure_13_3_1 Figure 13.3.1}).


{image:'Figure_13_3_1}
        

## Venous Return

After passing through the CNS, blood returns to the circulation through a series of  **dural sinuses** and veins ({'Figure_13_3_2 Figure 13.3.2}). The  **superior sagittal sinus** runs in the groove of the longitudinal fissure, where it absorbs CSF from the meninges. The superior sagittal sinus drains to the confluence of sinuses, along with the  **occipital sinuses** and  **straight sinus**, to then drain into the  **transverse sinuses**. The transverse sinuses connect to the  **sigmoid sinuses**, which then connect to the  **jugular veins**. From there, the blood continues toward the heart to be pumped to the lungs for reoxygenation.


{image:'Figure_13_3_2}
        
