index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 5.1
title: 5.1 - Introduction

This chapter assesses the information on {Topics.*Past_Climate past climate} obtained prior to the instrumental period. The information is based on data from various paleoclimatic archives and on modelling of past climate, and updates Chapter 6 of {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} of IPCC Working Group I ({cite.5.'Jansen_et_al_2007}).

The {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system} has responded and will continue to respond to various {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcings} (solar, volcanic and orbital) and to changes in atmospheric composition. {Glossary.*Paleoclimate Paleoclimate} data and modelling provide quantitative information on the Earth system response to these forcings. Paleoclimate information facilitates understanding of Earth system feedbacks on time scales longer than a few centuries, which cannot be evaluated from short instrumental records. Past climate changes also document transitions between different climate states, including abrupt events, which occurred on time scales of decades to a few centuries. They inform about multi-centennial to millennial baseline variability, against which the recent changes can be compared to assess whether or not they are unusual.

Major progress since AR4 includes the acquisition of new and more precise information from paleoclimate archives, the synthesis of regional information, and Paleoclimate Modelling Intercomparison Project Phase III (PMIP3) and Coupled {Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) simulations using the same models as for {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} (see {Chapters.1 Chapter 1}). This chapter assesses the understanding of past climate variations, using paleoclimate reconstructions as well as {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} of varying complexity, while the model evaluation based on paleoclimate information is covered in {Chapters.9 Chapter 9}. Additional paleoclimate perspectives are included in Chapters {Chapters.6}, {Chapters.10} and {Chapters.13} (see {'Table_5_1 Table 5.1}).

{table:'Table_5_1}

The content of this chapter is largely restricted to topics for which substantial new information has emerged since AR4. Examples include {Glossary.*Proxy proxy}-based estimates of the atmospheric carbon dioxide ({Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}) content during the past ~65 million years ({Chapters.5.5_2.5_2_2 Section 5.2.2}) and magnitude of sea level variations during interglacial periods ({Chapters.5.5_6.5_6_2 Section 5.6.2}). Information from glacial climates has been included only if the underlying processes are of direct relevance for an assessment of projected climate change. The impacts of past climate changes on biological systems and past civilizations are not covered, as these topics are beyond the scope of Working Group I.

The chapter proceeds from evidence for pre-industrial changes in atmospheric composition and external solar and volcanic forcings ({Chapters.5.5_2 Section 5.2}, {FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}), to global and hemispheric responses ({Chapters.5.5_3 Section 5.3}). After evaluating the evidence for past changes in {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate modes} of variability ({Chapters.5.5_4 Section 5.4}), a specific focus is given to regional changes in temperature, {Glossary.*Cryosphere cryosphere} and {Glossary.*Hydroclimate hydroclimate} during the current interglacial period ({Chapters.5.5_5 Section 5.5}). Sections on {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} ({Chapters.5.5_6 Section 5.6}, {FAQ_5_2 FAQ 5.2}), abrupt climate changes ({Chapters.5.5_7 Section 5.7}) and illustrations of {Glossary.*Irreversibility irreversibility} and recovery time scales ({Chapters.5.5_8 Section 5.8}) conclude the chapter. While polar amplification of temperature changes is addressed in {Box_5_1 Box 5.1}, the relationships between ice sheets, sea level, atmospheric CO2 concentration and climate are addressed in several sections ({Box_5_2 Box 5.2}, Sections {Chapters.5.5_3.5_3_1 5.3.1} {Chapters.5.5_5 5.5}, and 5.8.1).

Additional information to this chapter is available in the Appendix. Processed data underlying the figures are stored in the PANGAEA database (www.pangaea.de), while model output from PMIP3 is available from pmip3.lsce.ipsl.fr. In all sections, information is structured by time, going from past to present. {'Table_5_1 Table 5.1} summarizes the past periods assessed in the subsections.
