index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.6.1.1
title: 10.6.1.1 - Temperature Extremes

{cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} concluded that ‘{Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} extremes have likely been affected by {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forcing’. Many indicators of climate extremes and variability showed changes consistent with warming, including a widespread reduction in number of frost days in mid-latitude regions and evidence that in many regions warm extremes had become warmer and cold extremes had become less cold. We next assess new studies made since AR4.

Relatively warm seasonal mean temperatures (e.g., those that have a recurrence once in 10 years) have seen a rapid increase in frequency for many regions worldwide ({cite.10.'Jones_et_al_2008}; {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2011}; {cite.10.'Hansen_et_al_2012}) and an increase in the occurrence frequencies of unusually warm seasonal and annual mean temperatures has been {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} in part to {Topics.*Human_Influence human influence} ({cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2011}; {cite.10.'Christidis_et_al_2012a}, 2012b).

A large amount of evidence supports changes in daily data based temperature extreme indices consistent with warming, despite different data sets or different methods for data processing having been used ({Chapters.2.2_6 Section 2.6}). The effects of human influence on daily {Topics.*Extreme_Events temperature extremes} is suggested by both qualitative and quantitative comparisons between observed and CMIP3 based modelled values of warm days and warm nights (the number of days exceeding the 90th percentile of daily maximum and daily minimum temperatures referred to as TX90p and TN90p, see also {Chapters.2.2_7 Section 2.7}) and cold days and cold nights (the number of days with daily maximum and daily minimum temperatures below the 10th percentile referred to as TX10p and TN10p; see also {Chapters.2.2_7 Section 2.7}). Trends in temperature extreme indices computed for Australia ({cite.10.'Alexander_and_Arblaster_2009}) and the USA ({cite.10.'Meehl_et_al_2007a}) using observations and simulations of the 20th century with nine {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} that include both anthropogenic and natural forcings are found to be consistent. Both observations and model simulations show a decrease in the number of frost days, and an increase in the growing season length, heatwave duration and TN90p in the second half of the 20th century. Two of the models (PCM and CCSM3) with simulations that include only anthropogenic or only natural forcings indicate that the observed changes are simulated with anthropogenic forcings, but not with natural forcings (even though there are some differences in the details of the forcings). {cite.10.'Morak_et_al_2011 Morak et al. (2011)} found that over many sub-continental regions, the number of warm nights (TN90p) shows detectable changes over the second half of the 20th century that are consistent with model simulated changes in response to historical {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcings}. They also found detectable changes in indices of temperature extremes when the data were analysed over the globe as a whole. As much of the long-term change in TN90p can be {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} based on the interannual correlation of TN90p with mean temperature, {cite.10.'Morak_et_al_2013 Morak et al. (2013)} conclude that the detectable changes are attributed in a multi-step approach (see {Chapters.10.10_2.10_2_4 Section 10.2.4}) in part to GHG increases. {cite.10.'Morak_et_al_2013 Morak et al. (2013)} have extended this analysis to TX10p, TN10p, TX90p as well as TN90p, using fingerprints from HadGEM1 and find detectable changes on global scales and in many regions ({'Figure_10_17 Figure 10.17}).

{image:'Figure_10_17}

Human influence has also been detected in two different measures of the intensity of extreme daily temperatures in a year. {cite.10.'Zwiers_et_al_2011 Zwiers et al. (2011)} compared four extreme temperature variables including warmest daily maximum and minimum temperatures (annual maximum daily maximum and minimum temperatures, referred to as TXx, TNx) and coldest daily maximum and minimum temperatures (annual minimum daily maximum and minimum temperatures, referred to as TXn, TNn) from observations and from simulations with anthropogenic forcing or anthropogenic and natural external forcings from seven {Glossary.*Semi_empirical_model GCMs}. They consider these extreme daily temperatures to follow generalized extreme value (GEV) distributions with location, shape and scale parameters. They fit GEV distributions to the observed extreme temperatures with location parameters as linear functions of signals obtained from the model simulation. They found that both anthropogenic influence and combined influence of anthropogenic and natural forcing can be detected in all four extreme temperature variables at the global scale over the land, and also regionally over many large land areas ({'Figure_10_17 Figure 10.17}). In a complementary study, {cite.10.'Christidis_et_al_2011 Christidis et al. (2011)} used an optimal {Glossary.*Fingerprint fingerprint} method to compare observed and modelled time-varying location parameters of extreme temperature distributions. They detected the effects of anthropogenic forcing on warmest daily temperatures in a single fingerprint analysis, and were able to separate the effects of natural from anthropogenic forcings in a two fingerprint analysis.

Human influence on annual extremes of daily temperatures may be detected separately from natural forcing at the global scale ({cite.10.'Christidis_et_al_2011}) and also at continental and sub-continental scales ({cite.10.'Min_et_al_2013}). Over China, {cite.10.'Wen_et_al_2013 Wen et al. (2013)} showed that anthropogenic influence may be separately detected from that of natural forcing in daily extreme temperatures (TNn, TNx, TXn and TXx), although the influence of natural forcing is not detected, and they also showed that the influence of {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} in these indices may be separately detected from other anthropogenic forcings. {cite.10.'Christidis_et_al_2013 Christidis et al. (2013)} found that on a quasi-global scale, the cooling effect due to the decrease in tree cover and increase in grass cover since pre-industrial times as simulated by one {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESM} is detectable in the observed change of warm extremes. Urbanization may have also affected extreme temperatures in some regions; for example {cite.10.'Zhou_and_Ren_2011 Zhou and Ren (2011)} found that extreme temperature warms more in rural stations than in urban sites in China. The effect of {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} and urban heat Island is found to be small in GMST ({Chapters.2.2_4.2_4_1.2_4_1_3 Section 2.4.1.3}). Consequently, this effect on extreme temperature is also expected to be small in the global average.

These new studies show that there is stronger evidence for anthropogenic forcing on changes in extreme temperatures than at the time of the SREX assessment. New evidence since SREX includes the separation of the influence of anthropogenic forcings from that of natural forcings on extreme daily temperatures at the global scale and to some extent at continental and sub-continental scales in some regions. These new results suggest more clearly the role of anthropogenic forcing on temperature extremes compared to results at the time of the SREX assessment. We assess that it is very likely that human influence has contributed to the observed changes in the frequency and intensity of daily temperature extremes on the global scale since the mid-20th century.
