index: hide
name: The Breasts

Whereas the breasts are located far from the other female reproductive organs, they are considered accessory organs of the female reproductive system. The function of the breasts is to supply milk to an infant in a process called lactation. The external features of the breast include a nipple surrounded by a pigmented  **areola** ({'Figure_28_2_9 Figure 28.2.9}), whose coloration may deepen during pregnancy. The areola is typically circular and can vary in size from 25 to 100 mm in diameter. The areolar region is characterized by small, raised areolar glands that secrete lubricating fluid during lactation to protect the nipple from chafing. When a baby nurses, or draws milk from the breast, the entire areolar region is taken into the mouth.

Breast milk is produced by the  **mammary glands**, which are modified sweat glands. The milk itself exits the breast through the nipple via 15 to 20  **lactiferous ducts** that open on the surface of the nipple. These lactiferous ducts each extend to a  **lactiferous sinus** that connects to a glandular lobe within the breast itself that contains groups of milk-secreting cells in clusters called  **alveoli** (see {'Figure_28_2_9 Figure 28.2.9}). The clusters can change in size depending on the amount of milk in the alveolar lumen. Once milk is made in the alveoli, stimulated myoepithelial cells that surround the alveoli contract to push the milk to the lactiferous sinuses. From here, the baby can draw milk through the lactiferous ducts by suckling. The lobes themselves are surrounded by fat tissue, which determines the size of the breast; breast size differs between individuals and does not affect the amount of milk produced. Supporting the breasts are multiple bands of connective tissue called  **suspensory ligaments** that connect the breast tissue to the dermis of the overlying skin.


{image:'Figure_28_2_9}
        

During the normal hormonal fluctuations in the menstrual cycle, breast tissue responds to changing levels of estrogen and progesterone, which can lead to swelling and breast tenderness in some individuals, especially during the secretory phase. If pregnancy occurs, the increase in hormones leads to further development of the mammary tissue and enlargement of the breasts.
