index: hide
name: Atomic Spectra

Now let us turn our attention to the  *emission and absorption of EM radiation by gases*. The Sun is the most common example of a body containing gases emitting an EM spectrum that includes visible light. We also see examples in neon signs and candle flames. Studies of emissions of hot gases began more than two centuries ago, and it was soon recognized that these emission spectra contained huge amounts of information. The type of gas and its temperature, for example, could be determined. We now know that these EM emissions come from electrons transitioning between energy levels in individual atoms and molecules; thus, they are called  **atomic spectra**. Atomic spectra remain an important analytical tool today. {'Figure30_1_3a Figure30.1.3a} shows an example of an emission spectrum obtained by passing an electric discharge through a material. One of the most important characteristics of these spectra is that they are discrete. By this we mean that only certain wavelengths, and hence frequencies, are emitted. This is called a line spectrum. If frequency and energy are associated as <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mrow><mn>Δ</mn><mi fontstyle="italic">E</mi><mo stretchy="false">=</mo><mstyle fontstyle="italic"><mrow><mtext>hf</mtext></mrow></mstyle><mtext>,</mtext></mrow></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;ΔE =  ital &quot;hf&quot;&#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math> the energies of the electrons in the emitting atoms and molecules are quantized. This is discussed in more detail later in this chapter.


{image:'Figure30_1_3a}
        

It was a major puzzle that atomic spectra are quantized. Some of the best minds of 19th-century science failed to explain why this might be. Not until the second decade of the 20th century did an answer based on quantum mechanics begin to emerge. Again a macroscopic or classical body of gas was involved in the studies, but the effect, as we shall see, is due to individual atoms and molecules.
