index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.4.5
title: 13.4.5 - Anthropogenic Intervention in Water Storage on Land

The potential future effects that {Topics.*Human_Influence human activities} have on changing water storage on land, thus affecting {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level}, have been little studied in the published peer-reviewed scientific literature. For depletion of groundwater arising from extraction (for agriculture and other uses), we consider two possibilities. The first assumes that this contribution to GMSL rise continues throughout the 21st century at the rate of 0.40 ± 0.11 mm yr–1 (mean ± SD) assessed for 2001–2008 by {cite.13.'Konikow_2011 Konikow (2011)}, amounting to 38 [21 to 55] mm by 2081–2100 relative to 1986–2005. The second uses results from land surface hydrology models ({cite.13.'Wada_et_al_2012}) with input from climate and socioeconomic {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} for SRES {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}, yielding 70 [51 to 90] mm for the same time interval. Because of the improved treatment of groundwater recharge by {cite.13.'Wada_et_al_2012 Wada et al. (2012)}, this is less than {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b Rahmstorf et al. (2012b)} obtained by assuming that the groundwater extraction estimates of {cite.13.'Wada_et_al_2010 Wada et al. (2010)} can be scaled up in the future with global population. These two possibilities indicate a range of about 20 to 90 mm for the contribution of groundwater depletion to GMSL rise.

For the rate of impoundment of water in reservoirs, we evaluate two possibilities. The first assumes it will continue throughout the 21st century (e.g., Lempérière, 2006) at the average rate of –0.2 ± 0.05 mm yr–1 {Glossary.*Sea_level_equivalent SLE} (mean ± SD) estimated for 1971–2010 using data updated from {cite.13.'Chao_et_al_2008 Chao et al. (2008)}, giving a negative contribution to GMSL rise of –19 [–11 to –27] mm by 2081–2100 relative to 1986–2005. The second assumes it will be zero after 2010 (i.e., no further net impoundment), as shown for the 1990s and 2000s by {cite.13.'Lettenmaier_and_Milly_2009 Lettenmaier and Milly (2009)} (see {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_4 Section 13.3.4} for discussion). A zero contribution implies a balance between further construction of {Glossary.*Reservoir reservoir} capacity and reduction of storage volume by sedimentation, each of which could plausibly have a rate of about 1% yr–1 of existing capacity (Lempérière, 2006; {cite.13.'Lettenmaier_and_Milly_2009}). These two possibilities together indicate a range of about 0 to 30 mm of GMSL fall for the contribution of reservoir impoundment.

Our assessment thus leads to a range of –10 to +90 mm for the net contribution to GMSL rise from {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} intervention in {Glossary.*Land_water_storage land water storage} by 2081–2100 relative to 1986–2005. This range includes the range of 0 to 40 mm assumed by {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2008 Katsman et al. (2008)}. Because of the limited information available, we do not have sufficient confidence to give ranges for individual RCP scenarios.
