index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.4
title: 4.2.2.4 - Ice Thickness and Volume

For the Arctic, there are several techniques available for estimating the thickness distribution of {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}. Combined data sets of draft and thickness from submarine sonars, satellite {Glossary.*Altimetry altimetry} and airborne electromagnetic sensing provide broadly consistent and strong evidence of decrease in Arctic sea ice thickness in recent years ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}c).

Data collected by upward-looking sonar on submarines operating beneath the Arctic pack ice provided the first evidence of ‘basin-wide’ decreases in ice thickness ({cite.4.'Wadhams_1990}). Sonar measurements are of average draft (the submerged portion of sea ice), which is converted to thickness by assuming an average density for the measured floe including its snow cover. With the then available submarine records, {cite.4.'Rothrock_et_al_1999 Rothrock et al. (1999)} found that ice draft in the mid-1990s was less than that measured between 1958 and 1977 in each of six regions within the Arctic Basin. The change was least (–0.9 m) in the Beaufort and Chukchi seas and greatest (–1.7 m) in the Eurasian Basin. The decrease averaged about 42% of the average 1958 to 1977 thickness. This decrease matched the decline measured in the Eurasian Basin between 1976 and 1996 using UK submarine data ({cite.4.'Wadhams_and_Davis_2000}), which was 43%.

A subsequent analysis of US Navy submarine ice draft ({cite.4.'Rothrock_et_al_2008}) used much richer and more geographically extensive data from 34 cruises within a data release area that covered almost 38% of the area of the Arctic Ocean. These cruises were equally distributed in spring and autumn over a 25-year period between 1975 and 2000. Observational uncertainty associated with the ice draft from these is 0.5 m ({cite.4.'Rothrock_and_Wensnahan_2007}). Multiple regression analysis was used to separate the interannual changes ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}c), the annual cycle and the spatial distribution of draft in the observations. Results of that analysis show that the annual mean ice thickness declined from a peak of 3.6 m in 1980 to 2.4 m in 2000, a decrease of 1.2 m. Over the period, the most rapid change was –0.08 m yr–1 in 1990.

The most recent submarine record, {cite.4.'Wadhams_et_al_2011 Wadhams et al. (2011)}, found that tracks north of Greenland repeated between the winters of 2004 and 2007 showed a continuing shift towards less multi-year ice.

Satellite altimetry techniques are now capable of mapping sea ice freeboard to provide relatively comprehensive pictures of the distribution of Arctic sea ice thickness. Similar to the estimation of sea ice thickness from ice draft, satellite measured freeboard (the height of sea ice above the water surface) is converted to thickness, assuming an average density of ice and snow. The principal challenges to accurate thickness estimation using satellite altimetry are in the discrimination of ice and open water, and in estimating the thickness of the snow cover.

Since 1993, radar altimeters on the European Space Agency (ESA), European Remote Sensing (ERS) and Envisat satellites have provided Arctic observations south of 81.5°N. With the limited latitudinal reach of these altimeters, however, it has been difficult to infer basin-wide changes in thickness. The ERS-1 estimates of ice thickness show a downward {Glossary.*Trend trend} but, because of the high variability and short time series (1993–2001), {cite.4.'Laxon_et_al_2003 Laxon et al. (2003)} concluded that the trend in a {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} of mixed seasonal and multi-year ice (i.e., below 81.5°N) cannot be considered as significant. Envisat observations showed a large decrease in thickness (0.25 m) following September 2007 when ice extent was the second lowest on record ({cite.4.'Giles_et_al_2008b}). This was associated with the large retreat of the summer ice cover, with thinning regionally confined to the Beaufort and Chukchi seas, but with no significant changes in the eastern Arctic. These results are consistent with those from the NASA Ice, Cloud and land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) laser altimeter (see comment on ICESat data in {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_2.4_4_2_1 Section 4.4.2.1}), which show thinning in the same regions between 2007 and 2008 ({cite.4.'Kwok_2009}) ({'Figure_4_5 Figure 4.5}). Large decreases in thickness due to the 2007 minimum in summer ice are clearly seen in both the radar and laser altimeter thickness estimates.

{image:'Figure_4_5}

The coverage of the laser altimeter on ICESat (which ceased operation in 2009) extended to 86°N and provided a more complete spatial pattern of the thickness distribution in the Arctic Basin ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}c). Thickness estimates are consistently within 0.5 m of sonar measurements from near-coincident submarine tracks and profiles from sonar moorings in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas ({cite.4.'Kwok_2009}). Ten ICESat campaigns between autumn 2003 and spring 2008 showed seasonal differences in thickness and thinning and volume losses of the Arctic Ocean ice cover ({cite.4.'Kwok_2009}). Over these campaigns, the multi-year sea ice thickness in spring declined by ~0.6 m ({'Figure_4_5 Figure 4.5}), while the average thickness of the first-year ice (~2 m) had a negligible trend. The average sea ice volume inside the Arctic Basin in spring (February/ March) was ~14,000 km3. Between 2004 and 2008, the total multi-year ice volume in spring (February/March) experienced a net loss of 6300 km3 (>40%). Residual differences between sonar mooring and satellite thicknesses suggest basin-scale volume {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} of approximately 700 km3. The rate of volume loss (–1237 km3 yr–1) during autumn (October/November), while highlighting the large changes during the short ICESat record compares with a more moderate loss rate (–280 ± 100 km3 yr–1) over a 31-year period (1979–2010) estimated from a sea ice {Topics.*Reanalysis reanalysis} study using the Pan-Arctic Ice-Ocean Modelling and Assimilation system ({cite.4.'Schweiger_et_al_2011}).

{image:'Figure_4_6}

The CryoSat-2 radar altimeter (launched in 2010), which provides coverage up to 89°N, has provided new thickness and volume estimates of Arctic Ocean sea ice ({cite.4.'Laxon_et_al_2013}). These show that the ice volume inside the Arctic Basin decreased by a total of 4291 km3 in autumn (October/November) and 1479 km3 in winter (February/March) between the ICESat (2003–2008) and CryoSat-2 (2010–2012) periods. Based on ice thickness estimates from sonar moorings, an inter-satellite bias between ICESat and CryoSat-2 of 700 km3 can be expected. This is much less than the change in volume between the two periods.

Airborne electro-magnetic (EM) sounding measures the distance between an EM instrument near the surface or on an aircraft and the ice/water interface, and provides another method to measure ice thickness. Uncertainties in these thickness estimates are 0.1 m over level ice. Comparison with drill-hole measurements over a mix of level and ridged ice found differences of 0.17 m ({cite.4.'Haas_et_al_2011}).

Repeat EM surveys in the Arctic, though restricted in time and space, have provided a regional view of the changing ice cover. From repeat ground-based and helicopter-borne EM surveys, {cite.4.'Haas_et_al_2008 Haas et al. (2008)} found significant thinning in the region of the Transpolar Drift (an average wind-driven drift pattern that transports sea ice from the Siberian coast of Russia across the Arctic Basin to Fram Strait). Between 1991 and 2004, the modal ice thickness decreased from 2.5 m to 2.2 m, with a larger decline to 0.9 m in 2007. Mean ice thicknesses also decreased strongly. This thinning was associated with reduction of the age of the ice, and replacement of second-yGeraeernliacned by first-year ice in 2007 (following the large decline in summer ice extent in 2007) as seen in satellite observations. Ice thickness estimates from EM surveys near the North Pole can be compared to submarine estimates ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}c). Airborne EM measurements from the Lincoln Sea between 83°N and 84°N since 2004 ({cite.4.'Haas_et_al_2010}) showed some of the thickest ice in the Arctic, with mean and modal thicknesses of more than 4.5 m and 4 m, respectively. Since 2008, the modal thickness in this region has declined to 3.5 m, which is most likely related to the narrowing of the remaining band of old ice along the northern coast of Canada.
