index: hide
name: Kidney Infections (Pyelonephritis and Glomerulonephritis)

Pyelonephritis, an inflammation of the kidney, can be caused by bacteria that have spread from other parts of the urinary tract (such as the bladder). In addition,  **pyelonephritis** can develop from bacteria that travel through the bloodstream to the kidney. When the infection spreads from the lower urinary tract, the causative agents are typically fecal bacteria such as  *E. coli*. Common signs and symptoms include back pain (due to the location of the kidneys), fever, and nausea or vomiting. Gross  **hematuria** (visible blood in the urine) occurs in 30–40% of women but is rare in men. The infection can become serious, potentially leading to  **bacteremia** and systemic effects that can become life-threatening. Scarring of the kidney can occur and persist after the infection has cleared, which may lead to dysfunction.

Diagnosis of pyelonephritis is made using microscopic examination of urine, culture of urine, testing for leukocyte esterase and nitrite levels, and examination of the urine for blood or protein. It is also important to use blood cultures to evaluate the spread of the pathogen into the bloodstream. Imaging of the kidneys may be performed in high-risk patients with diabetes or immunosuppression, the elderly, patients with previous renal damage, or to rule out an obstruction in the kidney. Pyelonephritis can be treated with either oral or intravenous antibiotics, including  **penicillins**,  **cephalosporins**,  **vancomycin**,  **fluoroquinolones**,  **carbapenems**, and  **aminoglycosides**.

Glomerulonephritis occurs when the glomeruli of the nephrons are damaged from inflammation. Whereas pyelonephritis is usually acute,  **glomerulonephritis** may be acute or chronic. The most well-characterized mechanism of glomerulonephritis is the post-streptococcal sequelae associated with  **Streptococcus pyogenes** throat and skin infections. Although  *S. pyogenes* does not directly infect the glomeruli of the kidney, immune complexes that form in blood between  *S. pyogenes* antigens and antibodies lodge in the capillary endothelial cell junctions of the glomeruli and trigger a damaging inflammatory response. Glomerulonephritis can also occur in patients with  **bacterial endocarditis** (infection and inflammation of heart tissue); however, it is currently unknown whether glomerulonephritis associated with endocarditis is also immune-mediated.

## Leptospirosis

 **Leptospira** are generally harmless spirochetes that are commonly found in the soil. However, some pathogenic species can cause an infection called  **leptospirosis** in the kidneys and other organs ({'Figure_23_2_Leptospira Figure 23.2.Leptospira}). Leptospirosis can produce fever, headache, chills, vomiting, diarrhea, and rash with severe muscular pain. If the disease continues to progress, infection of the kidney, meninges, or liver may occur and may lead to organ failure or meningitis. When the kidney and liver become seriously infected, it is called  **Weil’s disease**. Pulmonary hemorrhagic syndrome can also develop in the lungs, and  **jaundice** may occur.

 *Leptospira* spp. are found widely in animals such as dogs, horses, cattle, pigs, and rodents, and are excreted in their urine. Humans generally become infected by coming in contact with contaminated soil or water, often while swimming or during flooding; infection can also occur through contact with body fluids containing the bacteria. The bacteria may enter the body through mucous membranes, skin injuries, or by ingestion. The mechanism of pathogenicity is not well understood.

Leptospirosis is extremely rare in the United States, although it is endemic in Hawaii; 50% of all cases in the United States come from Hawaii. It is more common in tropical than in temperate climates, and individuals who work with animals or animal products are most at risk. The bacteria can also be cultivated in specialized media, with growth observed in broth in a few days to four weeks; however, diagnosis of leptospirosis is generally made using faster methods, such as detection of antibodies to  *Leptospira* spp. in patient samples using serologic testing. Polymerase chain reaction ( **PCR**), enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay ( **ELISA**), slide agglutination, and indirect immunofluorescence tests may all be used for diagnosis. Treatment for leptospirosis involves broad-spectrum antibiotics such as  **penicillin** and  **doxycycline**. For more serious cases of leptospirosis, antibiotics may be given intravenously.


{image:'Figure_23_2_Leptospira}
        
