index: hide
name: Classifying Matter

We can classify matter into several categories. Two broad categories are mixtures and pure substances. A  **pure substance** has a constant composition. All specimens of a pure substance have exactly the same makeup and properties. Any sample of sucrose (table sugar) consists of 42.1% carbon, 6.5% hydrogen, and 51.4% oxygen by mass. Any sample of sucrose also has the same physical properties, such as melting point, color, and sweetness, regardless of the source from which it is isolated.

We can divide pure substances into two classes: elements and compounds. Pure substances that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by chemical changes are called  **elements**. Iron, silver, gold, aluminum, sulfur, oxygen, and copper are familiar examples of the more than 100 known elements, of which about 90 occur naturally on the earth, and two dozen or so have been created in laboratories.

Pure substances that can be broken down by chemical changes are called  **compounds**. This breakdown may produce either elements or other compounds, or both. Mercury(II) oxide, an orange, crystalline solid, can be broken down by heat into the elements mercury and oxygen ({'Figure_1_2_decomp Figure 1.2.decomp}). When heated in the absence of air, the compound sucrose is broken down into the element carbon and the compound water. (The initial stage of this process, when the sugar is turning brown, is known as caramelization—this is what imparts the characteristic sweet and nutty flavor to caramel apples, caramelized onions, and caramel). Silver(I) chloride is a white solid that can be broken down into its elements, silver and chlorine, by absorption of light. This property is the basis for the use of this compound in photographic films and photochromic eyeglasses (those with lenses that darken when exposed to light).


{image:'Figure_1_2_decomp}
        

The properties of combined elements are different from those in the free, or uncombined, state. For example, white crystalline sugar (sucrose) is a compound resulting from the chemical combination of the element carbon, which is a black solid in one of its uncombined forms, and the two elements hydrogen and oxygen, which are colorless gases when uncombined. Free sodium, an element that is a soft, shiny, metallic solid, and free chlorine, an element that is a yellow-green gas, combine to form sodium chloride (table salt), a compound that is a white, crystalline solid.

A  **mixture** is composed of two or more types of matter that can be present in varying amounts and can be separated by physical changes, such as evaporation (you will learn more about this later). A mixture with a composition that varies from point to point is called a  **heterogeneous mixture**. Italian dressing is an example of a heterogeneous mixture ({'Figure_1_2_Mixtures Figure 1.2.Mixtures}). Its composition can vary because we can make it from varying amounts of oil, vinegar, and herbs. It is not the same from point to point throughout the mixture—one drop may be mostly vinegar, whereas a different drop may be mostly oil or herbs because the oil and vinegar separate and the herbs settle. Other examples of heterogeneous mixtures are chocolate chip cookies (we can see the separate bits of chocolate, nuts, and cookie dough) and granite (we can see the quartz, mica, feldspar, and more).

A  **homogeneous mixture**, also called a  **solution**, exhibits a uniform composition and appears visually the same throughout. An example of a solution is a sports drink, consisting of water, sugar, coloring, flavoring, and electrolytes mixed together uniformly ({'Figure_1_2_Mixtures Figure 1.2.Mixtures}). Each drop of a sports drink tastes the same because each drop contains the same amounts of water, sugar, and other components. Note that the composition of a sports drink can vary—it could be made with somewhat more or less sugar, flavoring, or other components, and still be a sports drink. Other examples of homogeneous mixtures include air, maple syrup, gasoline, and a solution of salt in water.


{image:'Figure_1_2_Mixtures}
        

Although there are just over 100 elements, tens of millions of chemical compounds result from different combinations of these elements. Each compound has a specific composition and possesses definite chemical and physical properties by which we can distinguish it from all other compounds. And, of course, there are innumerable ways to combine elements and compounds to form different mixtures. A summary of how to distinguish between the various major classifications of matter is shown in ({'Figure_1_2_MattType Figure 1.2.MattType}).


{image:'Figure_1_2_MattType}
        

Eleven elements make up about 99% of the earth’s crust and atmosphere (). Oxygen constitutes nearly one-half and silicon about one-quarter of the total quantity of these elements. A majority of elements on earth are found in chemical combinations with other elements; about one-quarter of the elements are also found in the free state.


****

| Element | Symbol | Percent Mass |  | Element | Symbol | Percent Mass |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| oxygen | O | 49.20 |  | chlorine | Cl | 0.19 |
| silicon | Si | 25.67 | phosphorus | P | 0.11 |
| aluminum | Al | 7.50 | manganese | Mn | 0.09 |
| iron | Fe | 4.71 | carbon | C | 0.08 |
| calcium | Ca | 3.39 | sulfur | S | 0.06 |
| sodium | Na | 2.63 | barium | Ba | 0.04 |
| potassium | K | 2.40 | nitrogen | N | 0.03 |
| magnesium | Mg | 1.93 | fluorine | F | 0.03 |
| hydrogen | H | 0.87 | strontium | Sr | 0.02 |
| titanium | Ti | 0.58 | all others | - | 0.47 |
    
