index: hide
name: Characteristics of Communities

Communities are complex systems that can be characterized by their structure (the number and size of populations and their interactions) and dynamics (how the members and their interactions change over time). Understanding community structure and dynamics allows us to minimize impacts on ecosystems and manage ecological communities we benefit from.

## Biodiversity

Ecologists have extensively studied one of the fundamental characteristics of communities: biodiversity. One measure of biodiversity used by ecologists is the number of different species in a particular area and their relative abundance. The area in question could be a habitat, a biome, or the entire biosphere.  **Species richness** is the term used to describe the number of species living in a habitat or other unit. Species richness varies across the globe ({'Figure_19_4_11 Figure 19.4.11}). Ecologists have struggled to understand the determinants of biodiversity. Species richness is related to latitude: the greatest species richness occurs near the equator and the lowest richness occurs near the poles. Other factors influence species richness as well.  **Island biogeography** attempts to explain the great species richness found in isolated islands, and has found relationships between species richness, island size, and distance from the mainland.

 **Relative species abundance** is the number individuals in a species relative to the total number of individuals in all species within a system. Foundation species, described below, often have the highest relative abundance of species.


{image:'Figure_19_4_11}
        

## Foundation Species

 **Foundation species** are considered the “base” or “bedrock” of a community, having the greatest influence on its overall structure. They are often primary producers, and they are typically an abundant organism. For example, kelp, a species of brown algae, is a foundation species that forms the basis of the kelp forests off the coast of California.

Foundation species may physically modify the environment to produce and maintain habitats that benefit the other organisms that use them. Examples include the kelp described above or tree species found in a forest. The photosynthetic corals of the coral reef also provide structure by physically modifying the environment ({'Figure_19_4_12 Figure 19.4.12}). The exoskeletons of living and dead coral make up most of the reef structure, which protects many other species from waves and ocean currents.


{image:'Figure_19_4_12}
        

## Keystone Species

A  **keystone species** is one whose presence has inordinate influence in maintaining the prevalence of various species in an ecosystem, the ecological community’s structure, and sometimes its biodiversity.  *Pisaster ochraceus*, the intertidal sea star, is a keystone species in the northwestern portion of the United States ({'Figure_19_4_13 Figure 19.4.13}). Studies have shown that when this organism is removed from communities, mussel populations (their natural prey) increase, which completely alters the species composition and reduces biodiversity. Another keystone species is the banded tetra, a fish in tropical streams, which supplies nearly all of the phosphorus, a necessary inorganic nutrient, to the rest of the community. The banded tetra feeds largely on insects from the terrestrial ecosystem and then excretes phosphorus into the aquatic ecosystem. The relationships between populations in the community, and possibly the biodiversity, would change dramatically if these fish were to become extinct.


{image:'Figure_19_4_13}
        
