index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.1.4
title: 8.7.1.4 - Uncertainties and Limitations related to Global Warming Potential and Global Temperature change Potential

The uncertainty in the numerator of {Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP}; that is, the AGWPi (see formula in {'Figure_8_28 Figure 8.28}a) is determined by {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in lifetimes (or perturbation lifetimes) and radiative efficiency. Inclusion of indirect effects increases uncertainties (see below). For the reference gas {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}, the uncertainty is dominated by uncertainties in the impulse response function (IRF) that describes the development in atmospheric concentration that follows from an emission pulse ({cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013}); see {Box_6_2 Box 6.2} and Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12. The IRF is sensitive to model representation of the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle}, pulse size and background CO2 concentrations and climate.

Based on a multi-model study, {cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013 Joos et al. (2013)} estimate uncertainty ranges for the time-integrated IRF for CO2 to be ±15% and ±25% (5 to 95% uncertainty range) for 20and 100-year time horizons, respectively. Assuming quadratic error propagation, and ±10% uncertainty in radiative efficiency, the uncertainty ranges in AGWP for CO2 were estimated to be ±18% and ±26% for 20 and 100 years. These uncertainties affect all metrics that use CO2 as reference. {cite.8.'Reisinger_et_al_2010 Reisinger et al. (2010)} and {cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013 Joos et al. (2013)} show that these uncertainties increase with time horizon.

The same factors contribute to uncertainties in the GTP, with an additional contribution from the parameters describing the ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} and {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity}. In the first presentation of the GTP, {cite.8.'Shine_et_al_2005a Shine et al. (2005a)} used one time constant for the {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} in their analytical expression. Improved approaches were used by {cite.8.'Boucher_and_Reddy_2008 Boucher and Reddy (2008)}, {cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2010 Collins et al. (2010)} and {cite.8.'Berntsen_and_Fuglestvedt_2008 Berntsen and Fuglestvedt (2008)} that include more explicit representations of the deep ocean that increased the long-term response to a pulse {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}. Over the range of climate sensitivities from {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, GTP50 for {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} was found to vary by a factor of 2, the {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} GTP50 varied by about 50%, while for {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O} essentially no dependence was found ({cite.8.'Fuglestvedt_et_al_2010}). AGTPs for CO2 were also calculated in the multi-model study by {cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013 Joos et al. (2013)}. They found uncertainty ranges in AGTP that are much larger than for AGWP; ±45% and ±90% for 20 and 100 years (5 to 95% uncertainty range). These uncertainty ranges also reflect the signal-tonoise ratio, and not only uncertainty in the physical mechanisms.

There are studies combining uncertainties in various input parameters. {cite.8.'Reisinger_et_al_2011 Reisinger et al. (2011)} estimated the uncertainty in the GWP for CH4 and found an uncertainty of –30 to +40% for the GWP100 and –50 to +75% for GTP100 of CH4 (for 5 to 95% of the range). {cite.8.'Boucher_2012 Boucher (2012)} performed a Monte Carlo analysis with uncertainties in perturbation {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} and radiative efficiency, and for GWP100 for CH4 (assuming a constant background {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}) he found ±20%, and –40 to +65 for GTP100 (for 5 to 95% uncertainty range).

Here we estimate uncertainties in GWP values based on the uncertainties given for radiative efficiencies ({Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_1 Section 8.3.1}), perturbation lifetimes, indirect effects and in the AGWP for the reference gas CO2 (see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12). For CH4 GWP we estimate an uncertainty of ±30% and ±40% for 20and 100-year time horizons, respectively (for 5 to 95% uncertainty range). The uncertainty is dominated by AGWP for CO2 and indirect effects. For gases with lifetimes of a century or more the uncertainties are of the order of ±20% and ±30% for 20and 100-year horizons. The uncertainty in GWPs for gases with lifetimes of a few decades is estimated to be of the order of ±25% and ±35% for 20 and 100 years. For shorter-lived gases, the uncertainties in GWPs will be larger (see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12 for a discussion of contributions to the total uncertainty.) For GTP, few uncertainty estimates are available in the literature. Based on the results from {cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013 Joos et al. (2013)}, {cite.8.'Reisinger_et_al_2010 Reisinger et al. (2010)} and {cite.8.'Boucher_2012 Boucher (2012)} we assess the uncertainty to be of the order of ±75% for the CH4 GTP100.

The metric values are also strongly dependent on which processes are included in the definition of a metric. Ideally all indirect effects (Sections {Chapters.8.8_2 8.2} and {Chapters.8.8_3 8.3}) should be taken into account in the calculation of metrics. The indirect effects of CH4 on its own lifetime, tropospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} and stratospheric water have been traditionally included in its GWP. {cite.8.'Boucher_et_al_2009 Boucher et al. (2009)} have quantified an indirect effect on CO2 when fossil fuel CH4 is oxidized in the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}. {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2009 Shindell et al. (2009)} estimated the impact of reactive species {Topics.*Emissions emissions} on both gaseous and {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing species and found that ozone {Glossary.*Precursors precursors}, including CH4, had an additional substantial climate effect because they increased or decreased the rate of oxidation of SO2 to sulphate aerosol. Studies with different sulphur cycle formulations have found lower sensitivity ({cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2010}; {cite.8.'Fry_et_al_2012}). {cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2010 Collins et al. (2010)} postulated an additional component to their GWPs and GTPs for ozone precursors due to the decreased productivity of plants under higher levels of surface ozone. This was estimated to have the same magnitude as the ozone and CH4 effects. This effect, however, has so far only been examined with one model. In a complex and interconnected system, feedbacks can become increasingly complex, and uncertainty of the magnitude and even direction of {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} increases the further one departs from the primary perturbation, resulting in a trade-off between completeness and robustness, and hence utility for decision-making.

{cite.8.'Gillett_and_Matthews_2010 Gillett and Matthews (2010)} included climate–carbon feedbacks in calculations of GWP for CH4 and N2O and found that this increased the values by about 20% for 100 years. For GTP of CH4 they found an increase of ~80%. They used numerical models for their studies and suggest that climate–carbon feedbacks should be considered and parameterized when used in simple models to derive metrics. {cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2013 Collins et al. (2013)} parameterize the climate-carbon feedback based on {cite.8.'Friedlingstein_et_al_2006 Friedlingstein et al. (2006)} and {cite.8.'Arora_et_al_2013 Arora et al. (2013)} and find that this more than doubles the GTP100 for CH4. Enhancement of the GTP for CH4 due to carbon–climate feedbacks may also explain the higher GTP values found by {cite.8.'Reisinger_et_al_2010 Reisinger et al. (2010)}.

The inclusion of indirect effects and feedbacks in metric values has been inconsistent in the IPCC reports. In {cite.1.'IPCC_1996 SAR} and {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR}, a carbon model without a coupling to a {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} was used for calculation of IRF for CO2 ({cite.8.'Joos_et_al_1996}), while in AR4 climate-carbon feedbacks were included for the CO2 IRF ({cite.8.'Plattner_et_al_2008}). For the time horizons 20 and 100 years, the AGWPCO2 calculated with the Bern3D-LPJ model is, depending on the pulse size, 4 to 5% and 13 to 15% lower, respectively, when carbon cycle–climate feedbacks are not included ({cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013}). While the AGWP for the reference gas CO2 included climate–carbon feedbacks, this is not the case for the non-CO2 gas in the numerator of GWP, as recognized by {cite.8.'Gillett_and_Matthews_2010 Gillett and Matthews (2010)}, {cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013 Joos et al. (2013)}, {cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2013 Collins et al. (2013)} and {cite.8.'Sarofim_2012 Sarofim (2012)}. This means that the GWPs presented in AR4 may underestimate the relative impacts of non-CO2 gases. The different inclusions of feedbacks partially represent the current state of knowledge, but also reflect inconsistent and ambiguous definitions. In calculations of AGWP for CO2 in AR5 we use the IRF for CO2 from {cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013 Joos et al. (2013)} which includes climate–carbon feedbacks. {Glossary.*Metric Metric} values in AR5 are presented both with and without including climate–carbon feedbacks for non-CO2 gases. This feedback is based on the carbon-cycle response in a similar set of models ({cite.8.'Arora_et_al_2013}) as used for the reference gas ({cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2013}).

The effect of including this feedback for the non-reference gas increases with time horizon due to the long-lived nature of the initiated CO2 perturbation ({'Table_8_7 Table 8.7}). The relative importance also increases with decreasing lifetime of the component, and is larger for GTP than GWP due to the integrative nature of GWP. We calculate an increase in the CH4 GWP100 of 20%. For GTP100, however, the changes are much larger; of the order of 160%. For the shorter time horizons (e.g., 20 years) the effect of including this feedback is small (<5%) for both GWP and GTP. For the more long-lived gases the GWP100 values increase by 10 to 12%, while for GTP100 the increase is 20 to 30%. Table 8.A.1 gives metric values including the climate–carbon feedback for CO2 only, while Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.16 gives values for all {Glossary.*Halocarbons halocarbons} that include the climate–carbon feedback. Though uncertainties in the carbon cycle are substantial, it is likely that including the climate–carbon feedback for non-CO2 gases as well as for CO2 provides a better estimate of the metric value than including it only for CO2.

{table:'Table_8_7}

Emission metrics can be estimated based on a constant or variable background climate and this influences both the adjustment times and the concentration–forcing–temperature relationships. Thus, all metric values will need updating due to changing atmospheric conditions as well as improved input data. In AR5 we define the metric values with respect to a constant present-day condition of concentrations and climate. However, under non-constant background, {cite.8.'Joos_et_al_2013 Joos et al. (2013)} found decreasing CO2 AGWP100 for increasing background levels (up to 23% for {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}). This means that GWP for all non-CO2 gases (except CH4 and N2O) would increase by roughly the same magnitude. {cite.8.'Reisinger_et_al_2011 Reisinger et al. (2011)} found a reduction in AGWP for CO2 of 36% for RCP8.5 from 2000 to 2100 and that the CH4 radiative efficiency and AGWP also decrease with increasing CH4 concentration. Accounting for both effects, the GWP100 for CH4 would increase by 10 to 20% under low and mid-range {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} by 2100, but would decrease by up to 10% by mid-century under the highest RCP. While these studies have focused on the background levels of {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs}, the same issues apply for temperature. Olivié et al. (2012) find different temperature IRFs depending on the background climate (and experimental set up).

User related choices (see {Box_8_4 Box 8.4}) such as the time horizon can greatly affect the numerical values obtained for CO2 equivalents. For a change in time horizon from 20 to 100 years, the GWP for CH4 decreases by a factor of approximately 3 and its GTP by more than a factor of 10. Short-lived species are most sensitive to this choice. Some approaches have removed the time horizon from the metrics (e.g., {cite.8.'Boucher_2012}), but discounting is usually introduced which means that a discount rate r (for the weighting function e–rt) must be chosen instead. The choice of discount rate is also value based (see WGIII, {Chapters.3 Chapter 3}).

For NTCFs the metric values also depend on the location and timing of emission and whether regional or global metrics are used for these gases is also a choice for the users. Metrics are usually calculated for pulses, but some studies also give metric values that assume constant emissions over the full time horizon (e.g., {cite.8.'Shine_et_al_2005a}; {cite.8.'Jacobson_2010}). It is important to be aware of the idealized assumption about constant future emissions (or change in emissions) of the compound being considered if metrics for sustained emissions are used.
