index: hide
name: Cancer Vaccines

There are two types of  **cancer vaccines**: preventive and therapeutic. Preventive vaccines are used to prevent cancer from occurring, whereas therapeutic vaccines are used to treat patients with cancer. Most preventive cancer vaccines target viral infections that are known to lead to cancer. These include vaccines against  **human papillomavirus (HPV)** and  **hepatitis B**, which help prevent cervical and liver cancer, respectively.

Most therapeutic cancer vaccines are in the experimental stage. They exploit  **tumor-specific antigens** to stimulate the immune system to selectively attack cancer cells. Specifically, they aim to enhance T<sub>H</sub>1 function and interaction with cytotoxic T cells, which, in turn, results in more effective attack on abnormal tumor cells. In some cases, researchers have used genetic engineering to develop antitumor vaccines in an approach similar to that used for DNA vaccines (see ). The vaccine contains a recombinant plasmid with genes for tumor antigens; theoretically, the tumor gene would not induce new cancer because it is not functional, but it could trick the immune system into targeting the tumor gene product as a foreign invader.

The first FDA-approved therapeutic cancer vaccine was  **sipuleucel-T (Provenge)**, approved in 2010 to treat certain cases of  **prostate cancer**. This unconventional vaccine is custom designed using the patient’s own cells. APCs are removed from the patient and cultured with a tumor-specific molecule; the cells are then returned to the patient. This approach appears to enhance the patient’s immune response against the cancer cells. Another therapeutic cancer vaccine (talimogene laherparepvec, also called  **T-VEC** or  **Imlygic**) was approved by the FDA in 2015 for treatment of  **melanoma**, a form of skin cancer. This vaccine contains a virus that is injected into tumors, where it infects and lyses the tumor cells. The virus also induces a response in lesions or tumors besides those into which the vaccine is injected, indicating that it is stimulating a more general (as opposed to local) antitumor immune response in the patient.
