index: hide
name: Cancer Immunobiology and Immunotherapy - Introduction

Cancer involves a loss of the ability of cells to control their  **cell cycle**, the stages each eukaryotic cell goes through as it grows and then divides. When this control is lost, the affected cells rapidly divide and often lose the ability to differentiate into the cell type appropriate for their location in the body. In addition, they lose  **contact inhibition** and can start to grow on top of each other. This can result in formation of a  **tumor**. It is important to make a distinction here: The term “ **cancer**” is used to describe the diseases resulting from loss of cell-cycle regulation and subsequent cell proliferation. But the term “tumor” is more general. A “tumor” is an abnormal mass of cells, and a tumor can be  **benign** (not cancerous) or  **malignant** (cancerous).

Traditional cancer treatment uses radiation and/or chemotherapy to destroy cancer cells; however, these treatments can have unwanted side effects because they harm normal cells as well as cancer cells. Newer, promising therapies attempt to enlist the patient’s immune system to target cancer cells specifically. It is known that the immune system can recognize and destroy cancerous cells, and some researchers and immunologists also believe, based on the results of their experiments, that many cancers are eliminated by the body’s own defenses before they can become a health problem. This idea is not universally accepted by researchers, however, and needs further investigation for verification.
