index: hide
name: Cell-Mediated Response to Tumors

Cell-mediated immune responses can be directed against cancer cells, many of which do not have the normal complement of self-proteins, making them a target for elimination. Abnormal cancer cells may also present  **tumor antigen**s. These tumor antigens are not a part of the screening process used to eliminate lymphocytes during development; thus, even though they are self-antigens, they can stimulate and drive adaptive immune responses against abnormal cells.

Presentation of tumor antigens can stimulate  **naïve helper T cells** to become activated by cytokines such as  **IL-12** and differentiate into T<sub>H</sub>1 **cell**s. T<sub>H</sub>1 cells release cytokines that can activate natural killer (NK) cells and enhance the killing of activated  **cytotoxic T cell**s. Both  **NK cell**s and cytotoxic T cells can recognize and target cancer cells, and induce  **apoptosis** through the action of  **perforin**s and  **granzyme**s. In addition, activated cytotoxic T cells can bind to cell-surface proteins on abnormal cells and induce apoptosis by a second killing mechanism called the  **CD95 (Fas) cytotoxic pathway**.

Despite these mechanisms for removing cancerous cells from the body, cancer remains a common cause of death. Unfortunately, malignant tumors tend to actively suppress the immune response in various ways. In some cancers, the immune cells themselves are cancerous. In  **leukemia**, lymphocytes that would normally facilitate the immune response become abnormal. In other cancers, the cancerous cells can become resistant to induction of  **apoptosis**. This may occur through the expression of membrane proteins that shut off cytotoxic T cells or that induce regulatory T cells that can shut down immune responses.

The mechanisms by which cancer cells alter immune responses are still not yet fully understood, and this is a very active area of research. As scientists’ understanding of adaptive immunity improves, cancer therapies that harness the body’s immune defenses may someday be more successful in treating and eliminating cancer.
