index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.1.3
title: 7.1.3 - Forcing, Rapid Adjustments and Feedbacks

{'Figure_7_1 Figure 7.1} illustrates key aspects of how clouds and aerosols contribute to climate change, and provides an overview of important terminological distinctions. Forcings associated with agents such as greenhouse gases ({Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs}) and aerosols act on global mean {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} through the global radiative (energy) budget. Rapid adjustments (sometimes called rapid responses) arise when forcing agents, by altering flows of energy internal to the system, affect cloud cover or other components of the climate system and thereby alter the global budget indirectly. Because these adjustments do not operate through changes in the {Glossary.*Global_mean_surface_temperature global mean surface temperature} (DT), which are slowed by the massive heat capacity of the oceans, they are generally rapid and most are thought to occur within a few weeks. Feedbacks are associated with changes in climate variables that are mediated by a change in global mean surface temperature; they contribute to amplify or damp global temperature changes via their impact on the radiative budget.

{image:'Figure_7_1}

In this report, following an emerging consensus in the literature, the traditional concept of {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing} (RF, defined as the instantaneous radiative forcing with stratospheric adjustment only) is de-emphasized in favour of an absolute measure of the radiative effects of all responses triggered by the forcing agent that are independent of surface temperature change (see also {Chapters.8.8_1 Section 8.1}). This new measure of the forcing includes rapid adjustments and the net forcing with these adjustments included is termed the effective radiative forcing ({Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF}). The {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} to ERF will differ somewhat from traditional {Glossary.*Equilibrium_climate_sensitivity equilibrium climate sensitivity}, as the latter include adjustment effects. As shown in {'Figure_7_1 Figure 7.1}, adjustments can occur through geographic temperature variations, {Glossary.*Lapse_rate lapse rate} changes, cloud changes and vegetation effects. Measures of ERF and rapid adjustments have existed in the literature for more than a decade, with a number of different terminologies and calculation methods adopted. These were principally aimed to help quantify the effects of aerosols on clouds ({cite.7.'Rotstayn_and_Penner_2001}; {cite.7.'Lohmann_et_al_2010}) and understand different forcing agent responses ({cite.7.'Hansen_et_al_2005}), but it is now realized that there are rapid adjustments in response to the {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} forcing itself ({Chapters.7.7_2.7_2_5.7_2_5_6 Section 7.2.5.6}).

In principle rapid adjustments are independent of DT, while feedbacks operate purely through DT. Thus, within this framework adjustments are not another type of ‘{Glossary.*Feedback feedback}’ but rather a non-feedback phenomenon, required in the analysis by the fact that a single scalar DT cannot fully characterize the system. This framework brings most efficacies close to unity although they are not necessarily exactly 1 ({cite.7.'Hansen_et_al_2005}; {cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013}). There is also no clean separation in time scale between rapid adjustments and warming. Although the former occur mostly within a few days of applying a forcing ({cite.7.'Dong_et_al_2009}), some adjustments such as those that occur within the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} and snowpack can take several months or longer. Meanwhile the land surface warms quickly so that a small part of DT occurs within days to weeks of an applied forcing. This makes the two phenomena difficult to isolate in model runs. Other drawbacks are that adjustments are difficult to observe, and typically more model-dependent than RF. However, recent work is beginning to meet the challenges of quantifying the adjustments, and has noted advantages of the new framework (e.g., {cite.7.'Vial_et_al_2013}; {cite.7.'Zelinka_et_al_2013}).

There is no perfect method to determine ERF. Two common methods are to regress the net energy imbalance onto DT in a transient warming simulation ({cite.7.'Gregory_et_al_2004}; {'Figure_7_2 Figure 7.2}), or to simulate the {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} with sea {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} (SSTs) held fixed ({cite.7.'Hansen_et_al_2005}). The former can be complicated by natural variability or time-varying feedbacks, while the non-zero DT from land warming complicates the latter. Both methods are used in this chapter.

{image:'Figure_7_2}

{'Figure_7_3 Figure 7.3} links the former terminology of {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} direct, semi-direct and indirect effects with the new terminology used in this chapter and in {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}. The RF from aerosol–radiation interactions (abbreviated {Glossary.*Radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_radiation_interactions RFari}) encompasses radiative effects from {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} aerosols before any adjustment takes place and corresponds to what is usually referred to as the aerosol direct effect. Rapid adjustments induced by aerosol radiative effects on the surface {Topics.*Radiation_Budgets energy budget}, the atmospheric profile and cloudiness contribute to the ERF from aerosol–radiation interactions (abbreviated {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_radiation_interactions ERFari}). They include what has earlier been referred to as the semi-direct effect. The RF from aerosol–cloud interactions (abbreviated {Glossary.*Radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_cloud_interactions RFaci}) refers to the instantaneous effect on cloud {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} due to changing concentrations of cloud condensation and ice nuclei, also known as the Twomey effect. All subsequent changes to the cloud {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} and thermodynamics are rapid adjustments, which contribute to the ERF from aerosol–cloud interactions (abbreviated {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_cloud_interactions ERFaci}). RFaci is a theoretical construct that is not easy to separate from other aerosol–cloud interactions and is therefore not quantified in this chapter.

{image:'Figure_7_3}
