index: hide
name: Binary Fission

The most common mechanism of cell replication in bacteria is a process called  **binary fission**, which is depicted in {'Figure_9_1_binaryfiss Figure 9.1.binaryfiss}. Before dividing, the cell grows and increases its number of cellular components. Next, the replication of DNA starts at a location on the circular chromosome called the origin of replication, where the chromosome is attached to the inner cell membrane. Replication continues in opposite directions along the chromosome until the terminus is reached.

The center of the enlarged cell constricts until two daughter cells are formed, each offspring receiving a complete copy of the parental genome and a division of the cytoplasm (cytokinesis). This process of cytokinesis and cell division is directed by a protein called  **FtsZ**. FtsZ assembles into a  **Z ring** on the cytoplasmic membrane ({'Figure_9_1_Zring Figure 9.1.Zring}). The Z ring is anchored by FtsZ-binding proteins and defines the division plane between the two daughter cells. Additional proteins required for cell division are added to the Z ring to form a structure called the  **divisome**. The divisome activates to produce a peptidoglycan cell wall and build a  **septum** that divides the two daughter cells. The daughter cells are separated by the division septum, where all of the cells’ outer layers (the cell wall and outer membranes, if present) must be remodeled to complete division. For example, we know that specific enzymes break bonds between the monomers in peptidoglycans and allow addition of new subunits along the division septum.


{image:'Figure_9_1_binaryfiss}
        


{image:'Figure_9_1_Zring}
        
