index: hide
name: The Protein Synthesis Machinery

In addition to the mRNA template, many molecules and macromolecules contribute to the process of  **translation**. The composition of each component varies across taxa; for instance, ribosomes may consist of different numbers of ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and polypeptides depending on the organism. However, the general structures and functions of the protein synthesis machinery are comparable from bacteria to human cells. Translation requires the input of an mRNA template, ribosomes, tRNAs, and various enzymatic factors.

## Ribosomes

A  **ribosome** is a complex macromolecule composed of catalytic rRNAs (called  **ribozyme**s) and structural  **rRNA**s, as well as many distinct polypeptides. Mature rRNAs make up approximately 50% of each ribosome. Prokaryotes have 70S ribosomes, whereas eukaryotes have 80S ribosomes in the cytoplasm and rough endoplasmic reticulum, and 70S ribosomes in  **mitochondria** and  **chloroplasts**. Ribosomes dissociate into large and small subunits when they are not synthesizing proteins and reassociate during the  **initiation of translation**. In  *E. coli*, the  **small subunit** is described as 30S (which contains the 16S rRNA subunit), and the  **large subunit** is 50S (which contains the 5S and 23S rRNA subunits), for a total of 70S (Svedberg units are not additive). Eukaryote ribosomes have a small 40S subunit (which contains the 18S rRNA subunit) and a large 60S subunit (which contains the 5S, 5.8S and 28S rRNA subunits), for a total of 80S. The small subunit is responsible for binding the mRNA template, whereas the large subunit binds tRNAs (discussed in the next subsection).

Each mRNA molecule is simultaneously translated by many ribosomes, all synthesizing protein in the same direction: reading the mRNA from 5’ to 3’ and synthesizing the polypeptide from the N terminus to the C terminus. The complete structure containing an mRNA with multiple associated ribosomes is called a  **polyribosome** (or  **polysome**). In both bacteria and  **archaea**, before transcriptional termination occurs, each protein-encoding transcript is already being used to begin synthesis of numerous copies of the encoded polypeptide(s) because the processes of transcription and translation can occur concurrently, forming polyribosomes ({'Figure_11_4_Cotrantxn Figure 11.4.Cotrantxn}). The reason why transcription and translation can occur simultaneously is because both of these processes occur in the same 5’ to 3’ direction, they both occur in the cytoplasm of the cell, and because the RNA transcript is not processed once it is transcribed. This allows a prokaryotic cell to respond to an environmental signal requiring new proteins very quickly. In contrast, in eukaryotic cells, simultaneous transcription and translation is not possible. Although polyribosomes also form in eukaryotes, they cannot do so until RNA synthesis is complete and the RNA molecule has been modified and transported out of the nucleus.


{image:'Figure_11_4_Cotrantxn}
        

## Transfer RNAs

Transfer RNAs (tRNAs) are structural RNA molecules and, depending on the species, many different types of tRNAs exist in the cytoplasm. Bacterial species typically have between 60 and 90 types. Serving as adaptors, each  **tRNA** type binds to a specific codon on the mRNA template and adds the corresponding amino acid to the polypeptide chain. Therefore, tRNAs are the molecules that actually “translate” the language of RNA into the language of proteins. As the adaptor molecules of translation, it is surprising that tRNAs can fit so much specificity into such a small package. The tRNA molecule interacts with three factors: aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, ribosomes, and mRNA.

Mature tRNAs take on a three-dimensional structure when complementary bases exposed in the single-stranded RNA molecule hydrogen bond with each other ({'Figure_11_4_tRNA Figure 11.4.tRNA}). This shape positions the amino-acid binding site, called the  **CCA amino acid binding end**, which is a cytosine-cytosine-adenine sequence at the 3’ end of the tRNA, and the  **anticodon** at the other end. The anticodon is a three-nucleotide sequence that bonds with an mRNA codon through complementary base pairing.

An amino acid is added to the end of a tRNA molecule through the process of tRNA “charging,” during which each tRNA molecule is linked to its correct or  **cognate amino acid** by a group of enzymes called  **aminoacyl tRNA synthetase**s. At least one type of aminoacyl tRNA synthetase exists for each of the 20 amino acids. During this process, the amino acid is first activated by the addition of adenosine monophosphate (AMP) and then transferred to the tRNA, making it a  **charged tRNA**, and AMP is released.


{image:'Figure_11_4_tRNA}
        
