index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * In  **translation**, polypeptides are synthesized using mRNA sequences and cellular machinery, including tRNAs that match mRNA  **codons** to specific amino acids and ribosomes composed of RNA and proteins that catalyze the reaction.
  * The  **genetic code** is  **degenerate** in that several mRNA codons code for the same amino acids. The genetic code is almost universal among living organisms.
  * Prokaryotic (70S) and cytoplasmic eukaryotic (80S) ribosomes are each composed of a large subunit and a small subunit of differing sizes between the two groups. Each subunit is composed of rRNA and protein. Organelle ribosomes in eukaryotic cells resemble prokaryotic ribosomes.
  * Some 60 to 90 species of tRNA exist in bacteria. Each tRNA has a three-nucleotide  **anticodon** as well as a binding site for a  **cognate amino acid**. All tRNAs with a specific anticodon will carry the same amino acid.
  *  **Initiation** of translation occurs when the small ribosomal subunit binds with  **initiation factors** and an initiator tRNA at the  **start codon** of an mRNA, followed by the binding to the initiation complex of the large ribosomal subunit.
  * In prokaryotic cells, the start codon codes for N-formyl-methionine carried by a special initiator tRNA. In eukaryotic cells, the start codon codes for methionine carried by a special initiator tRNA. In addition, whereas ribosomal binding of the mRNA in prokaryotes is facilitated by the Shine-Dalgarno sequence within the mRNA, eukaryotic ribosomes bind to the 5’ cap of the mRNA.
  * During the  **elongation** stage of translation, a  **charged tRNA** binds to mRNA in the  **A site** of the ribosome; a peptide bond is catalyzed between the two adjacent amino acids, breaking the bond between the first amino acid and its tRNA; the ribosome moves one codon along the mRNA; and the first tRNA is moved from the  **P site** of the ribosome to the  **E site** and leaves the ribosomal complex.
  *  **Termination** of translation occurs when the ribosome encounters a  **stop codon**, which does not code for a tRNA. Release factors cause the polypeptide to be released, and the ribosomal complex dissociates.
  * In prokaryotes, transcription and translation may be coupled, with translation of an mRNA molecule beginning as soon as transcription allows enough mRNA exposure for the binding of a ribosome, prior to transcription termination. Transcription and translation are not coupled in eukaryotes because transcription occurs in the nucleus, whereas translation occurs in the cytoplasm or in association with the rough endoplasmic reticulum.
  * Polypeptides often require one or more  **post-translational modifications** to become biologically active.
