index: hide
name: Metabolic Acidosis: Primary Bicarbonate Deficiency

 **Metabolic acidosis** occurs when the blood is too acidic (pH below 7.35) due to too little bicarbonate, a condition called primary bicarbonate deficiency. At the normal pH of 7.40, the ratio of bicarbonate to carbonic acid buffer is 20:1. If a person’s blood pH drops below 7.35, then he or she is in metabolic acidosis. The most common cause of metabolic acidosis is the presence of organic acids or excessive ketones in the blood.  lists some other causes of metabolic acidosis.


****

| Cause | Metabolite |
|:-:|:-:|
| Diarrhea | Bicarbonate |
| Uremia | Phosphoric, sulfuric, and lactic acids |
| Diabetic ketoacidosis | Increased ketones |
| Strenuous exercise | Lactic acid |
| Methanol | Formic acid* |
| Paraldehyde | β-Hydroxybutyric acid* |
| Isopropanol | Propionic acid* |
| Ethylene glycol | Glycolic acid, and some oxalic and formic acids* |
| Salicylate/aspirin | Sulfasalicylic acid (SSA)* |
    

The first three of the eight causes of metabolic acidosis listed are medical (or unusual physiological) conditions. Strenuous exercise can cause temporary metabolic acidosis due to the production of lactic acid. The last five causes result from the ingestion of specific substances. The active form of aspirin is its metabolite, sulfasalicylic acid. An overdose of aspirin causes acidosis due to the acidity of this metabolite. Metabolic acidosis can also result from uremia, which is the retention of urea and uric acid. Metabolic acidosis can also arise from diabetic ketoacidosis, wherein an excess of ketones is present in the blood. Other causes of metabolic acidosis are a decrease in the excretion of hydrogen ions, which inhibits the conservation of bicarbonate ions, and excessive loss of bicarbonate ions through the gastrointestinal tract due to diarrhea.
