index: hide
name: Compensation Mechanisms

Various compensatory mechanisms exist to maintain blood pH within a narrow range, including buffers, respiration, and renal mechanisms. Although compensatory mechanisms usually work very well, when one of these mechanisms is not working properly (like kidney failure or respiratory disease), they have their limits. If the pH and bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio are changed too drastically, the body may not be able to compensate. Moreover, extreme changes in pH can denature proteins. Extensive damage to proteins in this way can result in disruption of normal metabolic processes, serious tissue damage, and ultimately death.

## Respiratory Compensation

Respiratory compensation for metabolic acidosis increases the respiratory rate to drive off CO<sub>2</sub> and readjust the bicarbonate to carbonic acid ratio to the 20:1 level. This adjustment can occur within minutes. Respiratory compensation for metabolic alkalosis is not as adept as its compensation for acidosis. The normal response of the respiratory system to elevated pH is to increase the amount of CO<sub>2</sub> in the blood by decreasing the respiratory rate to conserve CO<sub>2</sub>. There is a limit to the decrease in respiration, however, that the body can tolerate. Hence, the respiratory route is less efficient at compensating for metabolic alkalosis than for acidosis.

## Metabolic Compensation

Metabolic and renal compensation for respiratory diseases that can create acidosis revolves around the conservation of bicarbonate ions. In cases of respiratory acidosis, the kidney increases the conservation of bicarbonate and secretion of H<sup>+</sup> through the exchange mechanism discussed earlier. These processes increase the concentration of bicarbonate in the blood, reestablishing the proper relative concentrations of bicarbonate and carbonic acid. In cases of respiratory alkalosis, the kidneys decrease the production of bicarbonate and reabsorb H<sup>+ </sup>from the tubular fluid. These processes can be limited by the exchange of potassium by the renal cells, which use a K<sup>+</sup>-H<sup>+</sup> exchange mechanism (antiporter).

## Diagnosing Acidosis and Alkalosis

Lab tests for pH, CO<sub>2</sub> partial pressure (pCO<sub>2</sub>),<sub> </sub>and HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>– </sup>can identify acidosis and alkalosis, indicating whether the imbalance is respiratory or metabolic, and the extent to which compensatory mechanisms are working. The blood pH value, as shown in , indicates whether the blood is in acidosis, the normal range, or alkalosis. The pCO<sub>2</sub> and total HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup> values aid in determining whether the condition is metabolic or respiratory, and whether the patient has been able to compensate for the problem.  lists the conditions and laboratory results that can be used to classify these conditions. Metabolic acid-base imbalances typically result from kidney disease, and the respiratory system usually responds to compensate.


****

|  | pH | pCO<sub>2</sub> | Total HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup> |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Metabolic acidosis | ↓ | N, then ↓ | ↓ |
| Respiratory acidosis | ↓ | ↑ | N, then ↑ |
| Metabolic alkalosis | ↑ | N, then↑ | ↑ |
| Respiratory alkalosis | ↑ | ↓ | N, then ↓ |
    

Metabolic acidosis is problematic, as lower-than-normal amounts of bicarbonate are present in the blood. The pCO<sub>2</sub> would be normal at first, but if compensation has occurred, it would decrease as the body reestablishes the proper ratio of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO<sub>2</sub>.

Respiratory acidosis is problematic, as excess CO<sub>2 </sub>is present in the blood. Bicarbonate levels would be normal at first, but if compensation has occurred, they would increase in an attempt to reestablish the proper ratio of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO<sub>2</sub>.

Alkalosis is characterized by a higher-than-normal pH. Metabolic alkalosis is problematic, as elevated pH and excess bicarbonate are present. The pCO<sub>2</sub> would again be normal at first, but if compensation has occurred, it would increase as the body attempts to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO<sub>2</sub>.

Respiratory alkalosis is problematic, as CO<sub>2 </sub>deficiency is present in the bloodstream. The bicarbonate concentration would be normal at first. When renal compensation occurs, however, the bicarbonate concentration in blood decreases as the kidneys attempt to reestablish the proper ratios of bicarbonate and carbonic acid/CO<sub>2 </sub>by eliminating more bicarbonate to bring the pH into the physiological range.
