index: hide
name: Sponges

Animals in subkingdom Parazoa represent the simplest animals and include the sponges, or phylum  **Porifera** ({'Figure_15_2_1 Figure 15.2.1}). All sponges are aquatic and the majority of species are marine. Sponges live in intimate contact with water, which plays a role in their feeding, gas exchange, and excretion. Much of the body structure of the sponge is dedicated to moving water through the body so it can filter out food, absorb dissolved oxygen, and eliminate wastes.


{image:'Figure_15_2_1}
        

The body of the simplest sponges takes the shape of a cylinder with a large central cavity, the  **spongocoel**. Water enters the spongocoel from numerous pores in the body wall. Water flows out through a large opening called the  **osculum** ({'Figure_15_2_2 Figure 15.2.2}). However, sponges exhibit a diversity of body forms, which vary in the size and branching of the spongocoel, the number of osculi, and where the cells that filter food from the water are located.

Sponges consist of an outer layer of flattened cells and an inner layer of cells called choanocytes separated by a jelly-like substance called  **mesohyl**. The mesohyl contains embedded amoeboid cells that secrete tiny needles called  **spicules** or protein fibers that help give the sponge its structural strength. The cell body of the  **choanocyte** is embedded in mesohyl but protruding into the spongocoel is a mesh-like collar surrounding a single flagellum. The beating of flagella from all choanocytes moves water through the sponge. Food particles are trapped in mucus produced by the sieve-like collar of the choanocytes and are ingested by phagocytosis. This process is called  **intracellular digestion**.  **Amoebocytes** take up nutrients repackaged in food vacuoles of the choanocytes and deliver them to other cells within the sponge.


{image:'Figure_15_2_2}
        

## Physiological Processes in Sponges

Despite their lack of complexity, sponges are clearly successful organisms, having persisted on Earth for more than half a billion years. Lacking a true digestive system, sponges depend on the intracellular digestive processes of their choanocytes for their energy intake. The limit of this type of digestion is that food particles must be smaller than individual cells. Gas exchange, circulation, and excretion occur by diffusion between cells and the water.

Sponges reproduce both sexually and asexually. Asexual reproduction is either by  **fragmentation** (in which a piece of the sponge breaks off and develops into a new individual), or  **budding** (an outgrowth from the parent that eventually detaches). A type of asexual reproduction found only in freshwater sponges occurs through the formation of  **gemmules**, clusters of cells surrounded by a tough outer layer. Gemmules survive hostile environments and can attach to a substrate and grow into a new sponge.

Sponges are  **monoecious** (or hermaphroditic), meaning one individual can produce both eggs and sperm. Sponges may be sequentially hermaphroditic, producing eggs first and sperm later. Eggs arise from amoebocytes and are retained within the spongocoel, whereas sperm arise from choanocytes and are ejected through the osculum. Sperm carried by water currents fertilize the eggs of other sponges. Early larval development occurs within the sponge, and free-swimming larvae are then released through the osculum. This is the only time that sponges exhibit mobility. Sponges are sessile as adults and spend their lives attached to a fixed substrate.
