index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.3
title: 4.2.2.3 - Multi-year/Seasonal Ice Coverage

The winter extent and area of the perennial and multi-year ice cover in the Central Arctic (i.e., excluding Greenland Sea multi-year ice) for 1979–2012 are shown in {'Figure_4_4 Figure 4.4}. Perennial ice is that which survives the summer, and the ice extent at summer minimum has been used as a measure of its coverage ({cite.4.'Comiso_2002}). Multi-year ice (as defined by World Meteorological Organization) is ice that has survived at least two summers. Generally, multi-year ice is less saline and has a distinct microwave signature that differs from the seasonal ice, and thus can be discriminated and monitored with satellite microwave radiometers ({cite.4.'Johannessen_et_al_1999}; {cite.4.'Zwally_and_Gloersen_2008}; {cite.4.'Comiso_2012}).

{image:'Figure_4_4}

{'Figure_4_4 Figure 4.4} shows similar interannual variability and large trends for both perennial and multi-year ice for the period 1979 to 2012. The extent of the perennial ice cover, which was about 7.9 × 106 km2 in 1980, decreased to as low as 3.5 × 106 km2 in 2012. Similarly, the multi-year ice extent decreased from about 6.2 × 106 km2 in 1981 to about 2.5 × 106 km2 in 2012. The trends in perennial ice extent and ice area were strongly negative at –11.5 ± 2.1 and –12.5 ± 2.1% per decade (very likely) respectively. These values indicate an increased rate of decline from the –6.4% and –8.5% per decade, respectively, reported for the 1979 to 2000 period by {cite.4.'Comiso_2002 Comiso (2002)}. The trends in multi-year ice extent and area are even more negative, at –13.5 ± 2.5 and –14.7 ± 3.0% per decade (very likely), respectively, as updated for the period 1979 to 2012 ({cite.4.'Comiso_2012}). The more negative {Glossary.*Trend trend} in ice area than in ice extent indicates that the average ice concentration of multi-year ice in the Central Arctic has also been declining. The rate of decline in the extent and area of multi-year ice cover is consistent with the observed decline of old ice types from the analysis of ice drift and {Glossary.*Ice_age ice age} by {cite.4.'Maslanik_et_al_2007 Maslanik et al. (2007)}, confirming that older and thicker ice types in the Arctic have been declining significantly. The more negative trend for the thicker multi-year ice area than that for the perennial ice area implies that the average thickness of the ice, and hence the ice volume, has also been declining.

Drastic changes in the multi-year ice coverage from QuikScat (satellite radar scatterometer) data, validated using high-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} Synthetic Aperture Radar data ({cite.4.'Kwok_2004}; {cite.4.'Nghiem_et_al_2007}), have also been reported. Some of these changes have been {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to the near zero replenishment of the Arctic multi-year ice cover by ice that survives the summer ({cite.4.'Kwok_2007}).
