index: hide
name: Physical Maps

A physical map provides detail of the actual physical distance between genetic markers, as well as the number of nucleotides. There are three methods scientists use to create a physical map: cytogenetic mapping, radiation hybrid mapping, and sequence mapping.  **Cytogenetic mapping** uses information from microscopic analysis of stained chromosome sections ({'Figure_17_2_2 Figure 17.2.2}). It is possible to determine the approximate distance between genetic markers using cytogenetic mapping, but not the exact distance (number of base pairs).  **Radiation hybrid mapping** uses radiation, such as x-rays, to break the DNA into fragments. We can adjust the radiation amount to create smaller or larger fragments. This technique overcomes the limitation of genetic mapping, and we can adjust the radiation so that increased or decreased recombination frequency does not affect it.  **Sequence mapping**resulted from DNA sequencing technology that allowed for creating detailed physical maps with distances measured in terms of the number of base pairs. Creating  **genomic libraries** and  **complementary DNA (cDNA) libraries** (collections of cloned sequences or all DNA from a genome) has sped the physical mapping process. A genetic site that scientists use to generate a physical map with sequencing technology (a sequence-tagged site, or STS) is a unique sequence in the genome with a known exact chromosomal location. An  **expressed sequence tag (EST)** and a single sequence length polymorphism (SSLP) are common STSs. An EST is a short STS that we can identify with cDNA libraries, while we obtain SSLPs from known genetic markers, which provide a link between genetic and physical maps.


{image:'Figure_17_2_2}
        
