index: hide
name: Epithelial Tissues

 **Epithelial tissues** cover the outside of organs and structures in the body and line the lumens of organs in a single layer or multiple layers of cells. The types of epithelia are classified by the shapes of cells present and the number of layers of cells. Epithelia composed of a single layer of cells is called  **simple epithelia**; epithelial tissue composed of multiple layers is called  **stratified epithelia**.  summarizes the different types of epithelial tissues.


****

| Cell shape | Description | Location |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| squamous | flat, irregular round shape | simple: lung alveoli, capillaries; stratified: skin, mouth, vagina |
| cuboidal | cube shaped, central nucleus | glands, renal tubules |
| columnar | tall, narrow, nucleus toward base; tall, narrow, nucleus along cell | simple: digestive tract; pseudostratified: respiratory tract |
| transitional | round, simple but appear stratified | urinary bladder |
    

## Squamous Epithelia

 **Squamous epithelial** cells are generally round, flat, and have a small, centrally located nucleus. The cell outline is slightly irregular, and cells fit together to form a covering or lining. When the cells are arranged in a single layer (simple epithelia), they facilitate diffusion in tissues, such as the areas of gas exchange in the lungs and the exchange of nutrients and waste at blood capillaries.


{image:'Figure_B33_2_1ab}
        

{'Figure_B33_2_1ab Figure B33.2.1ab} **a** illustrates a layer of squamous cells with their membranes joined together to form an epithelium. Image {'Figure_B33_2_1ab Figure B33.2.1ab} **b** illustrates squamous epithelial cells arranged in stratified layers, where protection is needed on the body from outside abrasion and damage. This is called a stratified squamous epithelium and occurs in the skin and in tissues lining the mouth and vagina.

## Cuboidal Epithelia

 **Cuboidal epithelial** cells, shown in {'Figure_33_2_2 Figure 33.2.2}, are cube-shaped with a single, central nucleus. They are most commonly found in a single layer representing a simple epithelia in glandular tissues throughout the body where they prepare and secrete glandular material. They are also found in the walls of tubules and in the ducts of the kidney and liver.


{image:'Figure_33_2_2}
        

## Columnar Epithelia

 **Columnar epithelial** cells are taller than they are wide: they resemble a stack of columns in an epithelial layer, and are most commonly found in a single-layer arrangement. The nuclei of columnar epithelial cells in the digestive tract appear to be lined up at the base of the cells, as illustrated in {'Figure_33_2_3 Figure 33.2.3}. These cells absorb material from the lumen of the digestive tract and prepare it for entry into the body through the circulatory and lymphatic systems.


{image:'Figure_33_2_3}
        

Columnar epithelial cells lining the respiratory tract appear to be stratified. However, each cell is attached to the base membrane of the tissue and, therefore, they are simple tissues. The nuclei are arranged at different levels in the layer of cells, making it appear as though there is more than one layer, as seen in {'Figure_33_2_4 Figure 33.2.4}. This is called  **pseudostratified**, columnar epithelia. This cellular covering has cilia at the apical, or free, surface of the cells. The cilia enhance the movement of mucus and trapped particles out of the respiratory tract, helping to protect the system from invasive microorganisms and harmful material that has been breathed into the body. Goblet cells are interspersed in some tissues (such as the lining of the trachea). The goblet cells contain mucus that traps irritants, which in the case of the trachea keep these irritants from getting into the lungs.


{image:'Figure_33_2_4}
        

## Transitional Epithelia

 **Transitional** or uroepithelial cells appear only in the urinary system, primarily in the bladder and ureter. These cells are arranged in a stratified layer, but they have the capability of appearing to pile up on top of each other in a relaxed, empty bladder, as illustrated in . As the urinary bladder fills, the epithelial layer unfolds and expands to hold the volume of urine introduced into it. As the bladder fills, it expands and the lining becomes thinner. In other words, the tissue transitions from thick to thin.
