index: hide
name: Antifungal Drugs

The most common mode of action for  **antifungal drugs** is the disruption of the cell membrane. Antifungals take advantage of small differences between fungi and humans in the biochemical pathways that synthesize sterols. The  **sterols** are important in maintaining proper membrane fluidity and, hence, proper function of the cell membrane. For most fungi, the predominant membrane sterol is  **ergosterol**. Because human cell membranes use  **cholesterol**, instead of ergosterol, antifungal drugs that target ergosterol synthesis are selectively toxic ({'Figure_14_3_sterols Figure 14.3.sterols}).


{image:'Figure_14_3_sterols}
        

The  **imidazoles** are synthetic fungicides that disrupt ergosterol biosynthesis; they are commonly used in medical applications and also in agriculture to keep seeds and harvested crops from molding. Examples include  **miconazole**,  **ketoconazole**, and  **clotrimazole**, which are used to treat fungal skin infections such as  **ringworm**, specifically  **tinea pedis** ( **athlete’s foot**),  **tinea cruris** ( **jock itch**), and  **tinea corporis**. These infections are commonly caused by  **dermatophytes** of the genera  **Trichophyton**,  **Epidermophyton**, and  **Microsporum**. Miconazole is also used predominantly for the treatment of vaginal yeast infections caused by the fungus  **Candida**, and ketoconazole is used for the treatment of  **tinea versicolor** and  **dandruff**, which both can be caused by the fungus  **Malassezia**.

The  **triazole** drugs, including  **fluconazole**, also inhibit  **ergosterol** biosynthesis. However, they can be administered orally or intravenously for the treatment of several types of systemic yeast infections, including  **oral thrush** and  **cryptococcal meningitis**, both of which are prevalent in patients with AIDS. The triazoles also exhibit more  **selective toxicity**, compared with the imidazoles, and are associated with fewer side effects.

The  **allylamines**, a structurally different class of synthetic antifungal drugs, inhibit an earlier step in ergosterol biosynthesis. The most commonly used allylamine is  **terbinafine** (marketed under the brand name  **Lamisil**), which is used topically for the treatment of dermatophytic skin infections like  **athlete’s foot**,  **ringworm**, and  **jock itch**. Oral treatment with terbinafine is also used for the treatment of fingernail and toenail fungus, but it can be associated with the rare side effect of  **hepatotoxicity**.

The  **polyenes** are a class of antifungal agents naturally produced by certain actinomycete soil bacteria and are structurally related to  **macrolides**. These large, lipophilic molecules bind to ergosterol in fungal cytoplasmic membranes, thus creating pores. Common examples include  **nystatin** and  **amphotericin B**. Nystatin is typically used as a topical treatment for yeast infections of the skin, mouth, and vagina, but may also be used for intestinal fungal infections. The drug  **amphotericin B** is used for systemic fungal infections like  **aspergillosis**,  **cryptococcal meningitis**,  **histoplasmosis**,  **blastomycosis**, and  **candidiasis**. Amphotericin B was the only antifungal drug available for several decades, but its use is associated with some serious side effects, including  **nephrotoxicity** (kidney toxicity).

Amphotericin B is often used in combination with  **flucytosine**, a fluorinated pyrimidine analog that is converted by a fungal-specific enzyme into a toxic product that interferes with both DNA replication and protein synthesis in fungi. Flucytosine is also associated with hepatotoxicity (liver toxicity) and bone marrow depression.

Beyond targeting  **ergosterol** in fungal cell membranes, there are a few antifungal drugs that target other fungal structures ({'Figure_14_3_antifungal Figure 14.3.antifungal}). The  **echinocandins**, including caspofungin, are a group of naturally produced antifungal compounds that block the synthesis of β(1→3) glucan found in fungal cell walls but not found in human cells. This drug class has the nickname “penicillin for fungi.” Caspofungin is used for the treatment of  **aspergillosis** as well as systemic yeast infections.

Although  **chitin** is only a minor constituent of fungal cell walls, it is also absent in human cells, making it a selective target. The  **polyoxins** and  **nikkomycins** are naturally produced antifungals that target chitin synthesis. Polyoxins are used to control fungi for agricultural purposes, and nikkomycin Z is currently under development for use in humans to treat yeast infections and  **Valley fever** ( **coccidioidomycosis**), a fungal disease prevalent in the southwestern US.

The naturally produced antifungal  **griseofulvin** is thought to specifically disrupt fungal cell division by interfering with microtubules involved in spindle formation during mitosis. It was one of the first antifungals, but its use is associated with  **hepatotoxicity**. It is typically administered orally to treat various types of dermatophytic skin infections when other topical antifungal treatments are ineffective.

There are a few drugs that act as antimetabolites against fungal processes. For example,  **atovaquone**, a representative of the  **naphthoquinone** drug class, is a semisynthetic antimetabolite for fungal and protozoal versions of a mitochondrial cytochrome important in electron transport. Structurally, it is an analog of  **coenzyme Q**, with which it competes for electron binding. It is particularly useful for the treatment of  **Pneumocystis pneumonia** caused by  **Pneumocystis jirovecii**. The antibacterial  **sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim** combination also acts as an antimetabolite against  *P. jirovecii*.

 shows the various therapeutic classes of antifungal drugs, categorized by mode of action, with examples of each.


{image:'Figure_14_3_antifungal}
        


****

| Mechanism of Action | Drug Class | Specific Drugs | Clinical Uses |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Inhibit ergosterol synthesis | Imidazoles | Miconazole, ketoconazole, clotrimazole | Fungal skin infections and vaginal yeast infections |
| Triazoles | Fluconazole | Systemic yeast infections, oral thrush, and cryptococcal meningitis |
| Allylamines | Terbinafine | Dermatophytic skin infections (athlete’s foot, ring worm, jock itch), and infections of fingernails and toenails |
| Bind ergosterol in the cell membrane and create pores that disrupt the membrane | Polyenes | Nystatin | Used topically for yeast infections of skin, mouth, and vagina; also used for fungal infections of the intestine |
| Amphotericin B | Variety systemic fungal infections |
| Inhibit cell wall synthesis | Echinocandins | Caspofungin | Aspergillosis and systemic yeast infections |
| Not applicable | Nikkomycin Z | Coccidioidomycosis (Valley fever) and yeast infections |
| Inhibit microtubules and cell division | Not applicable | Griseofulvin | Dermatophytic skin infections |
    
