index: hide
name: Pleura of the Lungs

Each lung is enclosed within a cavity that is surrounded by the pleura. The pleura (plural = pleurae) is a serous membrane that surrounds the lung. The right and left pleurae, which enclose the right and left lungs, respectively, are separated by the mediastinum. The pleurae consist of two layers. The  **visceral pleura** is the layer that is superficial to the lungs, and extends into and lines the lung fissures ({'Figure_23_2_2 Figure 23.2.2}). In contrast, the  **parietal pleura** is the outer layer that connects to the thoracic wall, the mediastinum, and the diaphragm. The visceral and parietal pleurae connect to each other at the hilum. The  **pleural cavity** is the space between the visceral and parietal layers.


{image:'Figure_23_2_2}
        

The pleurae perform two major functions: They produce pleural fluid and create cavities that separate the major organs.  **Pleural fluid** is secreted by mesothelial cells from both pleural layers and acts to lubricate their surfaces. This lubrication reduces friction between the two layers to prevent trauma during breathing, and creates surface tension that helps maintain the position of the lungs against the thoracic wall. This adhesive characteristic of the pleural fluid causes the lungs to enlarge when the thoracic wall expands during ventilation, allowing the lungs to fill with air. The pleurae also create a division between major organs that prevents interference due to the movement of the organs, while preventing the spread of infection.
