index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.2.3.1
title: 8.2.3.1 - Tropospheric Ozone

The {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF} from tropospheric ozone is strongly height and latitude-dependent through coupling of ozone change with temperature, water vapour and clouds ({cite.8.'Lacis_et_al_1990}; {cite.8.'Berntsen_et_al_1997}; {cite.8.'Worden_et_al_2008}, 2011; {cite.8.'Bowman_et_al_2013}). Consequently, it is necessary to accurately estimate the change in the ozone spatio-temporal structure using global models and observations. It is also well established that surface ozone detrimentally affects plant productivity ({cite.8.'Ashmore_2005}; {cite.8.'Fishman_et_al_2010}), albeit estimating this impact on climate, although possibly significant, is still limited to a few studies ({cite.8.'Sitch_et_al_2007}; {cite.8.'UNEP_2011}).

Tropospheric ozone is a by-product of the oxidation of carbon monoxide (CO), {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}, and non-CH4 hydrocarbons in the presence of nitrogen oxides (NOx). As {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of these {Glossary.*Precursors precursors} have increased ({'Figure_8_2 Figure 8.2}), tropospheric ozone has increased since pre-industrial times ({cite.8.'Volz_and_Kley_1988}; {cite.8.'Marenco_et_al_1994}) and over the last decades ({cite.8.'Parrish_et_al_2009}; {cite.8.'Cooper_et_al_2010}; {cite.8.'Logan_et_al_2012}), but with important regional variations ({Chapters.2.2_2 Section 2.2}). {Glossary.*Ozone Ozone} production is usually limited by the supply of HOx (OH + HO2) and NOX (NO + NO2) ({cite.8.'Levy_1971}; {cite.8.'Logan_et_al_1981}). Ozone’s major chemical loss pathways in the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} are through (1) photolysis (to O(1D), followed by reaction with water vapour) and (2) reaction with HO2 ({cite.8.'Seinfeld_and_Pandis_2006}). The former pathway leads to couplings between stratospheric ozone (photolysis rate being a function of the overhead ozone column) and climate change (through water vapour). Observed surface ozone abundances typically range from less than 10 ppb over the tropical Pacific Ocean to more than 100 ppb downwind of highly emitting regions. The {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} of ozone in the troposphere varies strongly with season and location: it may be as little as a few days in the tropical boundary layer, or as much as 1 year in the upper troposphere. Two recent studies give similar global mean lifetime of ozone: 22.3 ± 2 days ({cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2006}) and 23.4 ± 2.2 days ({cite.8.'Young_et_al_2013}).

For present (about 2000) conditions, the various components of the budget of global mean tropospheric ozone are estimated from the ACCMIP simulations and other model simulations since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({'Table_8_1 Table 8.1}). In particular, most recent models define a globally and annually averaged tropospheric ozone burden of (337 ± 23 Tg, 1-σ). Differences in the definition of the {Glossary.*Tropopause tropopause} lead to inter-model variations of approximately 10% ({cite.8.'Wild_2007}). This multi-model mean estimate of global annual tropospheric ozone burden has not significantly changed since the {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2006 Stevenson et al. (2006)} estimates (344 ± 39 Tg, 1-σ), and is consistent with the most recent satellite-based Ozone Monitoring Instrument–Microwave Limb Sounder (OMI-MLS; {cite.8.'Ziemke_et_al_2011}) and Tropospheric Emission Spectrometer (TES; {cite.8.'Osterman_et_al_2008}) climatologies.

{table:'Table_8_1}

Estimates of the ozone chemical sources and sinks ({Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} estimates are quoted here as 1-σ) are less robust, with a net chemical production (production minus loss) of 618 ± 275 Tg yr–1 ({'Table_8_1 Table 8.1}), larger than the Atmospheric Composition Change: a European Network (ACCENT) results (442 ± 309 Tg yr–1; {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2006}). Estimates of ozone deposition (1094 ± 264 Tg yr–1) are slightly increased since ACCENT (1003 ± 200 Tg yr–1) while estimates of the net influx of ozone from the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} to the troposphere (477 ± 96 Tg yr–1) have slightly decreased since ACCENT (552 ± 168 Tg yr–1). Additional model estimates of this influx ({cite.8.'Hegglin_and_Shepherd_2009}; {cite.8.'Hsu_and_Prather_2009}) fall within both ranges, as do estimates based on observations ({cite.8.'Murphy_and_Fahey_1994}; {cite.8.'Gettelman_et_al_1997}; Olsen et al., 2002), all estimates being sensitive to their choice of tropopause definition and interannual variability.

Model simulations for present-day conditions or the recent past are evaluated ({'Figure_8_3 Figure 8.3}) against frequent ozonesonde measurements ({cite.8.'Logan_1999}; {cite.8.'Tilmes_et_al_2012}) and additional surface, aircraft and satellite measurements. The ACCMIP model simulations ({'Figure_8_3 Figure 8.3}) indicate 10 to 20% negative bias at 250 hPa in the SH tropical {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, and a slight underestimate in NH tropical region. Comparison with satellite-based estimates of tropospheric ozone column ({cite.8.'Ziemke_et_al_2011}) indicates an annual mean bias of –4.3 ± 29 Tg (with a spatial correlation of 0.87 ± 0.07, 1-σ) for the ACCMIP simulations ({cite.8.'Young_et_al_2013}). Overall, our ability to simulate tropospheric ozone burden for present (about 2000) has not substantially changed since AR4. Evaluation (using a subset of two ACCMIP models) of simulated trends (1960s to present or shorter) in surface ozone against observations at remote surface sites (see {Chapters.2.2_2 Section 2.2}) indicates an underestimation, especially in the NH ({cite.8.'Lamarque_et_al_2010}). Although this limits the ability to represent recent ozone changes, it is unclear how this translates into an uncertainty on changes since pre-industrial times.

{image:'Figure_8_3}

In most studies ‘pre-industrial’ does not identify a specific year but is usually assumed to correspond to 1850s levels; no observational information on ozone is available for that time period. Using the {cite.8.'Lamarque_et_al_2010 Lamarque et al. (2010)} emissions, the ACCMIP models ({cite.8.'Young_et_al_2013}) are unable to reproduce the low levels of ozone observed at Montsouris 1876–1886 ({cite.8.'Volz_and_Kley_1988}). The other early ozone measurements using the Schönbein paper are controversial ({cite.8.'Marenco_et_al_1994}) and assessed to be of qualitative use only. The main uncertainty in estimating the pre-industrial to present-day change in ozone therefore remains the lack of constraint on emission trends because of the very incomplete knowledge of pre-industrial ozone concentrations, of which no new information is available. The uncertainty on pre-industrial conditions is not confined to ozone but applies to aerosols as well (e.g., {cite.8.'Schmidt_et_al_2012}), although ice and lake core records provide some constraint on pre-industrial {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} concentrations.

The ACCMIP results provide an estimated tropospheric ozone increase ({'Figure_8_4 Figure 8.4}) from 1850 to 2000 of 98 ± 17 Tg (model range), similar to AR4 estimates. {cite.8.'Skeie_et_al_2011a Skeie et al. (2011a)} found an additional 5% increase in the {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} contribution to the ozone burden between 2000 and 2010, which translates into an approximately 1.5% increase in tropospheric ozone burden. A best estimate of the change in ozone since 1850 is assessed at 100 ± 25 Tg (1-σ). {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change Attribution} simulations ({cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2013}) indicate unequivocally that anthropogenic changes in ozone precursor emissions are responsible for the increase between 1850 and present or into the future.

{image:'Figure_8_4}
