index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.7.4
title: 7.7.4 - Synthesis on Solar Radiation Management Methods

Theory, model studies and observations suggest that some {Glossary.*Solar_Radiation_Management SRM} methods may be able to counteract a portion of global warming effects (on temperature, {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} and precipitation) due to high concentrations of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} (high confidence). But the level of understanding about SRM is low, and it is difficult to assess feasibility and {Glossary.*Efficacy efficacy} because of remaining {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in important climate processes and the interactions among those processes. Although SRM research is still in its infancy, enough is known to identify some potential benefits, which must be weighed against known side effects (there could also be side effects that have not yet been identified). All studies suggest there would be a small but measurable decrease in global precipitation from SRM. Other side effects are specific to specific methods, and a number of research areas remain largely unexplored. There are also features that develop as a consequence of the combination of high {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} and SRM (e.g., effects on {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration} and precipitation). SRM counters only some consequences of elevated CO2 concentrations; it does not in particular address {Glossary.*Ocean_acidification ocean acidification}.

Many model studies indicate that stratospheric aerosol SRM could counteract some changes resulting from GHG increases that produce a RF as strong as 4 W m–2 (medium confidence), but they disagree on details. Marine cloud brightening SRM has received less attention, and there is no consensus on its efficacy, in large part due to the high level of uncertainty about cloud radiative responses to aerosol changes. There have been fewer studies and much less attention focused on all other SRM methods, and it is not currently possible to provide a general assessment of their specific efficacy, scalability, side effects and risks.

There is robust agreement among models and high confidence that the compensation between GHG warming and SRM cooling is imprecise. SRM would not produce a future climate identical to the present (or pre-industrial) climate. Nonetheless, although models disagree on details, they consistently suggest that a climate with SRM and high atmospheric CO2 levels would be closer to that of the last century than a world with elevated CO2 concentrations and no SRM ({cite.7.'Lunt_et_al_2008}; {cite.7.'Ricke_et_al_2010}; Moreno-Cruz et al., 2011), as long as the SRM could be continuously sustained and calibrated to offset the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} by GHGs. {Glossary.*Aerosol Aerosol}-based methods would, however, require a continuous program of replenishment to achieve this. If CO2 concentrations and SRM were increased in concert, the risks and residual climate change produced by the imprecise compensation between SRM and CO2 forcing would also increase. If SRM were terminated for any reason, a rapid increase in {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} (within a decade or two) to values consistent with the high GHG forcing would result (high confidence). This rate of climate change would far exceed what would have occurred without {Glossary.*Geoengineering geoengineering}, causing any impacts related to the rate of change to be correspondingly greater than they would have been without geoengineering. In contrast, SRM in concert with aggressive CO2 {Glossary.*Mitigation mitigation} might conceivably help avoid transitions across climate thresholds or tipping points that would be unavoidable otherwise.
