index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 14.7.3
title: 14.7.3 - Pacific Decadal Oscillation/Inter-decadal Pacific Oscillation

The Pacific Decadal Oscillation ({Glossary.*Pacific_Decadal_Oscillation PDO}, {Box_2_5 Box 2.5}) refers to the leading Empirical Orthogonal Function (EOF) of monthly {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} anomalies over the North Pacific (north of 20°N) from which the globally averaged SST anomalies have been subtracted ({cite.14.'Mantua_et_al_1997}). It exhibits anomalies of one sign along the west coast of North America and of opposite sign in the western and central North Pacific (see also {Chapters.9.9_5.9_5_3.9_5_3_6 Section 9.5.3.6} and {Chapters.11 Chapter 11}). The PDO is closely linked to fluctuations in the strength of the wintertime Aleutian Low Pressure System. The time scale of the PDO is around 20 to 30 years, with changes of sign between positive and negative polarities in the 1920s, the late 1940s, the late 1970s and around 2000.

The extension of the PDO to the whole Pacific basin is known as the Inter-decadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO, {cite.14.'Power_et_al_1999}). The IPO is nearly identical in form to the PDO in the NH but is defined globally, as a leading EOF (principal component) of 13-year lowpass-filtered global SST anomalies ({cite.14.'Parker_et_al_2007}) and has substantial amplitude in the tropical and southern Pacific. The time series of the PDO and IPO correlate highly on an annual basis. The PDO/IPO pattern is considered to be the result of internal {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} ({cite.14.'Schneider_and_Cornuelle_2005}; {cite.14.'Alexander_2010}) and has not been observed to exhibit a longterm {Glossary.*Trend trend}. The PDO/IPO is associated with {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} modulations, with more El Niño activity during the positive PDO/IPO and more {Glossary.*La_Nin_a La Niña} activity during the negative PDO/IPO.

At the time of the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, little had been published on modelling of the PDO/IPO or of its evolution in future. In a recent study, {cite.14.'Furtado_et_al_2011 Furtado et al. (2011)} found that the PDO/IPO did not exhibit major changes in spatial or temporal characteristics under GHG warming in most of the 24 CMIP3 models used, although some models indicated a weak shift toward more occurrences of the negative phase of the PDO/IPO by the end of the 21st century (2081–2100, Lapp et al., 2012). However, given that the models strongly underestimate the PDO/IPO connection with tropical Indo-Pacific SST variations ({cite.14.'Furtado_et_al_2011}; {cite.14.'Lienert_et_al_2011}), the credibility of the {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} remains uncertain. Furthermore, internal variability is so high that it is hard to detect any forced changes in the Aleutian Low for the next half a century ({cite.14.'Deser_et_al_2012}; {cite.14.'Oshima_et_al_2012}). Therefore confidence is low in projections of future changes in PDO/IPO.
