index: hide
name: Chapter Review

Antigens are nonself molecules, usually large proteins, which provoke an immune response. In transfusion reactions, antibodies attach to antigens on the surfaces of erythrocytes and cause agglutination and hemolysis. ABO blood group antigens are designated A and B. People with type A blood have A antigens on their erythrocytes, whereas those with type B blood have B antigens. Those with AB blood have both A and B antigens, and those with type O blood have neither A nor B antigens. The blood plasma contains preformed antibodies against the antigens not present on a person’s erythrocytes.

A second group of blood antigens is the Rh group, the most important of which is Rh D. People with Rh<sup>−</sup> blood do not have this antigen on their erythrocytes, whereas those who are Rh<sup>+</sup> do. About 85 percent of Americans are Rh<sup>+</sup>. When a woman who is Rh<sup>−</sup> becomes pregnant with an Rh<sup>+</sup> fetus, her body may begin to produce anti-Rh antibodies. If she subsequently becomes pregnant with a second Rh<sup>+</sup> fetus and is not treated preventively with RhoGAM, the fetus will be at risk for an antigen-antibody reaction, including agglutination and hemolysis. This is known as hemolytic disease of the newborn.

Cross matching to determine blood type is necessary before transfusing blood, unless the patient is experiencing hemorrhage that is an immediate threat to life, in which case type O<sup>−</sup> blood may be transfused.
