index: hide
name: Antigen-Antibody Interactions

Different classes of antibody play important roles in the body’s defense against pathogens. These functions include neutralization of pathogens, opsonization for phagocytosis, agglutination, complement activation, and antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity. For most of these functions, antibodies also provide an important link between adaptive specific immunity and innate nonspecific immunity.

 **Neutralization** involves the binding of certain antibodies (IgG, IgM, or IgA) to epitopes on the surface of pathogens or toxins, preventing their attachment to cells. For example, Secretory IgA can bind to specific pathogens and block initial attachment to intestinal mucosal cells. Similarly, specific antibodies can bind to certain toxins, blocking them from attaching to target cells and thus neutralizing their toxic effects. Viruses can be neutralized and prevented from infecting a cell by the same mechanism ({'Figure_18_4_neutral Figure 18.4.neutral}).

As described in <link:>,  **opsonization** is the coating of a pathogen with molecules, such as  **complement** factors,  **C-reactive protein**, and  **serum amyloid A**, to assist in phagocyte binding to facilitate  **phagocytosis**. IgG antibodies also serve as excellent opsonins, binding their Fab sites to specific epitopes on the surface of pathogens. Phagocytic cells such as  **macrophages**,  **dendritic cells**, and  **neutrophils** have receptors on their surfaces that recognize and bind to the Fc portion of the IgG molecules; thus, IgG helps such phagocytes attach to and engulf the pathogens they have bound ({'Figure_18_4_opson Figure 18.4.opson}).

 **Agglutination** or  **aggregation** involves the cross-linking of pathogens by antibodies to create large aggregates ({'Figure_18_4_agg Figure 18.4.agg}). IgG has two  **Fab antigen-binding sites**, which can bind to two separate pathogen cells, clumping them together. When multiple IgG antibodies are involved, large aggregates can develop; these aggregates are easier for the kidneys and spleen to filter from the blood and easier for phagocytes to ingest for destruction. The pentameric structure of  **IgM** provides ten Fab binding sites per molecule, making it the most efficient antibody for agglutination.


{image:'Figure_18_4_neutral}
        


{image:'Figure_18_4_opson}
        


{image:'Figure_18_4_agg}
        

Another important function of antibodies is activation of the  **complement cascade**. As discussed in the previous chapter, the complement system is an important component of the innate defenses, promoting the inflammatory response, recruiting  **phagocytes** to site of infection, enhancing phagocytosis by opsonization, and killing gram-negative bacterial pathogens with the  **membrane attack complex (MAC)**. Complement activation can occur through three different pathways (see {'Figure_17_3_ClassAltPa Figure 17.3.ClassAltPa}), but the most efficient is the  **classical pathway**, which requires the initial binding of IgG or IgM antibodies to the surface of a pathogen cell, allowing for recruitment and activation of the  **C1 complex**.

Yet another important function of antibodies is  **antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC)**, which enhances killing of pathogens that are too large to be phagocytosed. This process is best characterized for natural killer cells ( **NK cells**), as shown in {'Figure_18_4_NK Figure 18.4.NK}, but it can also involve  **macrophages** and  **eosinophils**. ADCC occurs when the  **Fab region** of an IgG antibody binds to a large pathogen;  **Fc receptors** on effector cells (e.g., NK cells) then bind to the Fc region of the antibody, bringing them into close proximity with the target pathogen. The effector cell then secretes powerful cytotoxins (e.g.,  **perforin** and  **granzymes**) that kill the pathogen.


{image:'Figure_18_4_NK}
        
