index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.7.3
title: 10.7.3 - Summary: Lessons from the Past

{Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution Detection} and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution studies} strengthen results from {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} that {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} contributed to {Topics.*Past_Climate past climate} variability and change prior to the 20th century. Ocean–{Topics.*Climate_System Atmosphere} General Circulation Models (OAGCMs) simulate similar changes on hemispheric and annual scales as those by simpler models used earlier, and enable detection of regional and seasonal changes. Results suggest that volcanic forcing and GHG forcing in particular are important for explaining past changes in NH temperatures. Results from data assimilation runs confirm that the combination of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} and {Glossary.*External_forcing external forcing} provides a consistent explanation of the last millennium and suggest that changes in circulation may have further contributed to climate anomalies. The role of external forcing extends to regional records, for example, European seasonal temperatures. In summary, it is very unlikely that NH temperature variations from 1400 to 1850 can be explained by internal variability alone. There is medium confidence that external forcing contributed to NH temperature variability from 850 to 1400. There is medium confidence that external forcing ({Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} and natural forcings together) contributed to European temperatures of the last five centuries.
