index: hide
name: Internal Resistance

As noted before, a 12-V truck battery is physically larger, contains more charge and energy, and can deliver a larger current than a 12-V motorcycle battery. Both are lead-acid batteries with identical emf, but, because of its size, the truck battery has a smaller internal resistance  *r size 12&#123;r&#125; &#123;&#125;*. Internal resistance is the inherent resistance to the flow of current within the source itself.

{'Figure_22_2_2 Figure 22.2.2} is a schematic representation of the two fundamental parts of any voltage source. The emf (represented by a script E in the figure) and internal resistance  *r size 12&#123;r&#125; &#123;&#125;* are in series. The smaller the internal resistance for a given emf, the more current and the more power the source can supply.


{image:'Figure_22_2_2}
        

The internal resistance  *r size 12&#123;r&#125; &#123;&#125;* can behave in complex ways. As noted,  *r size 12&#123;r&#125; &#123;&#125;* increases as a battery is depleted. But internal resistance may also depend on the magnitude and direction of the current through a voltage source, its temperature, and even its history. The internal resistance of rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells, for example, depends on how many times and how deeply they have been depleted.

Why are the chemicals able to produce a unique potential difference? Quantum mechanical descriptions of molecules, which take into account the types of atoms and numbers of electrons in them, are able to predict the energy states they can have and the energies of reactions between them.

In the case of a lead-acid battery, an energy of 2 eV is given to each electron sent to the anode. Voltage is defined as the electrical potential energy divided by charge: <math xmlns:fo="urn:oasis:names:tc:opendocument:xmlns:xsl-fo-compatible:1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mrow><mi>V</mi><mo stretchy="false">=</mo><mfrac><msub><mi>P</mi><mrow><mtext>E</mtext></mrow></msub><mi>q</mi></mfrac></mrow></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;V= &#123;  &#123;P rSub &#123; size 8&#123;E&#125; &#125; &#125;  over  &#123;q&#125; &#125; &#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>. An electron volt is the energy given to a single electron by a voltage of 1 V. So the voltage here is 2 V, since 2 eV is given to each electron. It is the energy produced in each molecular reaction that produces the voltage. A different reaction produces a different energy and, hence, a different voltage.
