index: hide
name: Structure and Composition of the Cell Membrane

The  **cell membrane** is an extremely pliable structure composed primarily of back-to-back phospholipids (a “bilayer”). Cholesterol is also present, which contributes to the fluidity of the membrane, and there are various proteins embedded within the membrane that have a variety of functions.

A single phospholipid molecule has a phosphate group on one end, called the “head,” and two side-by-side chains of fatty acids that make up the lipid tails ({'Figure_3_1_1 Figure 3.1.1}). The phosphate group is negatively charged, making the head polar and hydrophilic—or “water loving.” A  **hydrophilic** molecule (or region of a molecule) is one that is attracted to water. The phosphate heads are thus attracted to the water molecules of both the extracellular and intracellular environments. The lipid tails, on the other hand, are uncharged, or nonpolar, and are hydrophobic—or “water fearing.” A  **hydrophobic** molecule (or region of a molecule) repels and is repelled by water. Some lipid tails consist of saturated fatty acids and some contain unsaturated fatty acids. This combination adds to the fluidity of the tails that are constantly in motion. Phospholipids are thus amphipathic molecules. An  **amphipathic** molecule is one that contains both a hydrophilic and a hydrophobic region. In fact, soap works to remove oil and grease stains because it has amphipathic properties. The hydrophilic portion can dissolve in water while the hydrophobic portion can trap grease in micelles that then can be washed away.


{image:'Figure_3_1_1}
        

The cell membrane consists of two adjacent layers of phospholipids. The lipid tails of one layer face the lipid tails of the other layer, meeting at the interface of the two layers. The phospholipid heads face outward, one layer exposed to the interior of the cell and one layer exposed to the exterior ({'Figure_3_1_2 Figure 3.1.2}). Because the phosphate groups are polar and hydrophilic, they are attracted to water in the intracellular fluid. **Intracellular fluid (ICF)** is the fluid interior of the cell. The phosphate groups are also attracted to the extracellular fluid.  **Extracellular fluid (ECF)** is the fluid environment outside the enclosure of the cell membrane.  **Interstitial fluid (IF)** is the term given to extracellular fluid not contained within blood vessels. Because the lipid tails are hydrophobic, they meet in the inner region of the membrane, excluding watery intracellular and extracellular fluid from this space. The cell membrane has many proteins, as well as other lipids (such as cholesterol), that are associated with the phospholipid bilayer. An important feature of the membrane is that it remains fluid; the lipids and proteins in the cell membrane are not rigidly locked in place.


{image:'Figure_3_1_2}
        
