index: hide
name: The Heart

The heart is a complex muscle that consists of two pumps: one that pumps blood through  **pulmonary circulation** to the lungs, and the other that pumps blood through  **systemic circulation** to the rest of the body’s tissues (and the heart itself).

The heart is asymmetrical, with the left side being larger than the right side, correlating with the different sizes of the pulmonary and systemic circuits (). In humans, the heart is about the size of a clenched fist; it is divided into four chambers: two atria and two ventricles. There is one  **atrium** and one  **ventricle** on the right side and one atrium and one ventricle on the left side. The right atrium receives deoxygenated blood from the systemic circulation through the major veins: the  **superior vena cava**, which drains blood from the head and from the veins that come from the arms, as well as the  **inferior vena cava**, which drains blood from the veins that come from the lower organs and the legs. This deoxygenated blood then passes to the right ventricle through the  **tricuspid valve**, which prevents the backflow of blood. After it is filled, the right ventricle contracts, pumping the blood to the lungs for reoxygenation. The left atrium receives the oxygen-rich blood from the lungs. This blood passes through the  **bicuspid valve** to the left ventricle where the blood is pumped into the  **aorta**. The aorta is the major artery of the body, taking oxygenated blood to the organs and muscles of the body. This pattern of pumping is referred to as double circulation and is found in all mammals. ().
