index: hide
name: Mendel’s Crosses

Mendel’s seminal work was accomplished using the garden pea,  *Pisum sativum*, to study inheritance. This species naturally self-fertilizes, meaning that pollen encounters ova within the same flower. The flower petals remain sealed tightly until pollination is completed to prevent the pollination of other plants. The result is highly inbred, or “true-breeding,” pea plants. These are plants that always produce offspring that look like the parent. By experimenting with true-breeding pea plants, Mendel avoided the appearance of unexpected traits in offspring that might occur if the plants were not true breeding. The garden pea also grows to maturity within one season, meaning that several generations could be evaluated over a relatively short time. Finally, large quantities of garden peas could be cultivated simultaneously, allowing Mendel to conclude that his results did not come about simply by chance.

Mendel performed  **hybridizations**, which involve mating two true-breeding individuals that have different traits. In the pea, which is naturally self-pollinating, this is done by manually transferring pollen from the anther of a mature pea plant of one variety to the stigma of a separate mature pea plant of the second variety.

Plants used in first-generation crosses were called  **P**, or parental generation, plants ({'Figure_8_1_2 Figure 8.1.2}). Mendel collected the seeds produced by the P plants that resulted from each cross and grew them the following season. These offspring were called the  **F1**, or the first filial (filial = daughter or son), generation. Once Mendel examined the characteristics in the F<sub>1</sub> generation of plants, he allowed them to self-fertilize naturally. He then collected and grew the seeds from the F<sub>1</sub> plants to produce the  **F2**, or second filial, generation. Mendel’s experiments extended beyond the F<sub>2</sub> generation to the F<sub>3</sub> generation, F<sub>4 </sub>generation, and so on, but it was the ratio of characteristics in the P, F<sub>1</sub>, and F<sub>2</sub> generations that were the most intriguing and became the basis of Mendel’s postulates.


{image:'Figure_8_1_2}
        
