index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.5.2
title: 8.5.2 - Time Evolution of Historical Forcing

The time evolution of global mean forcing is shown in {'Figure_8_18 Figure 8.18} for the Industrial Era. Over all time periods during the Industrial Era {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} and other {Glossary.*Well_mixed_greenhouse_gas WMGHG} have been the dominant term, except for shorter periods with strong volcanic eruptions. The time evolution shows an almost continuous increase in the magnitude of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF}. This is the case both for CO2 and other {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs} as well as several individual {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} components. The forcing from CO2 and other WMGHGs has increased somewhat faster since the 1960s. {Topics.*Emissions Emissions} of CO2 have made the largest contribution to the increased {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} in every decade since the 1960s. The total aerosol ERF ({Glossary.*Aerosol_radiation_interaction aerosol–radiation interaction} and {Glossary.*Aerosol_cloud_interaction aerosol–cloud interaction}) has the strongest negative forcing (except for brief periods with large volcanic forcing), with a strengthening in the magnitude similar to many of the other anthropogenic forcing mechanisms with time. The global mean forcing of aerosol–radiation interactions was rather weak until 1950 but strengthened in the latter half of the last century and in particular in the period between 1950 and 1980. The RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction by aerosol component is shown in {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4 Section 8.3.4} ({'Figure_8_8 Figure 8.8}).

{image:'Figure_8_18}

Although there is high confidence for a substantial enhancement in the negative aerosol forcing in the period 1950–1980, there is much more uncertainty in the relative change in global mean aerosol forcing over the last two decades (1990–2010). Over the last two decades there has been a strong geographic shift in aerosol and aerosol precursor emissions (see {Chapters.2.2_2.2_2_3 Section 2.2.3}), and there are some {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in these emissions ({cite.8.'Granier_et_al_2011}). In addition to the regional changes in the aerosol forcing there is also likely a competition between various aerosol effects. Emission data indicate a small increase in the {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} emissions ({cite.8.'Granier_et_al_2011}) but model studies also indicate a weak enhancement of other aerosol types. Therefore, the net aerosol forcing depends on the balance between absorbing and scattering aerosols for aerosol–radiation interaction as well as balance between the changes in aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions. In the ACCMIP models, for example, the RF due to aerosol–radiation interaction becomes less negative during 1980 to 2000, but total aerosol ERF becomes more negative (Shindell et al., 2013c). There is a very low confidence for the {Glossary.*Trend trend} in the total aerosol forcing during the past two to three decades, even the sign; however, there is high confidence that the offset from aerosol forcing to WMGHG forcing during this period was much smaller than over the 1950–1980 period.

The volcanic RF has a very irregular temporal pattern and for certain years has a strongly negative RF. There has not been a major volcanic eruption in the past decade, but some weaker eruptions give a current RF that is slightly negative relative to 1750 and slightly stronger in magnitude compared to 1999–2002 (see {Chapters.8.8_4.8_4_2 Section 8.4.2}).

{'Figure_8_19 Figure 8.19} shows linear trends in forcing (anthropogenic, natural and total) over four different time periods. Three of the periods are the same as chosen in {Box_9_2 Box 9.2} (1984–1998, 1998–2011 and 1951–2011) and the period 1970–2011 is shown in {Box_13_1 Box 13.1}. Monte Carlo simulations are performed to derive uncertainties in the forcing based on ranges given in {'Table_8_6 Table 8.6} and the derived linear trends. Further, these uncertainties are combined with uncertainties derived from shifting time periods ±2 years and the full 90% confidence range is shown in {'Figure_8_19 Figure 8.19} (in {Box_9_2 Box 9.2} only the total forcing is shown with uncertainties derived from the forcing uncertainty without sensitivity to time period). For the anthropogenic forcing sensitivity to the selection of time periods is very small with a maximum contribution to the uncertainties shown in Figure 8.19 of 2%. However, for the natural forcing the sensitivity to time periods is the dominant contributor to the overall uncertainty (see Supplementary Material Figure 8.SM.3) for the relatively short periods 1998–2011 and 1984–1998, whereas this is not the case for the longer periods. For the 1998–2011 period the natural forcing is very likely negative and has offset 2 to 89% of the anthropogenic forcing. It is likely that the natural forcing change has offset at least 30% of the anthropogenic forcing increase and very likely that it has offset at least 10% of the anthropogenic increase. For the 1998–2011 period both the volcanic and solar forcings contribute to this negative natural forcing, with the latter dominating. For the other periods shown in {'Figure_8_19 Figure 8.19} the best estimate of the natural is much smaller in magnitude than the anthropogenic forcing, but note that the natural forcing is very dependent on the selection of time period near the 1984–1998 interval. Over the period 1951–2011 the trend in anthropogenic forcing is almost 0.3 W m–2 per decade and thus anthropogenic forcing over this period is more than 1.5 W m–2. The anthropogenic forcing for 1998–2011 is 30% higher and with smaller uncertainty than for the 1951–2011 period. Note that due to large WMGHG forcing ({Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_2 Section 8.3.2}) the anthropogenic forcing was similar in the late 1970s and early 1980s to the 1998–2011 period. The reason for the reduced uncertainty in the 1998–2011 anthropogenic forcing is the larger domination of WMGHG forcing and smaller contribution from aerosol forcing compared to previous periods. Similar to the results for 1970–2011 in {'Figure_8_19 Figure 8.19}, {Box_13_1 Box 13.1} shows that the global {Topics.*Radiation_Budgets energy budget} is dominated by anthropogenic forcing compared to the natural forcing, except for the two major volcanic eruption in this period as can be easily seen in {'Figure_8_18 Figure 8.18}.

{image:'Figure_8_19}

{'Figure_8_20 Figure 8.20} shows the forcing between 1980 and 2011. Compared to the whole Industrial Era the dominance of the CO2 is larger for this recent period both with respect to other WMGHG and the total anthropogenic RF. The forcing due to aerosols is rather weak leading to a very strong net positive ERF for the 1980–2011 period. More than 40% of the total anthropogenic ERF has occurred over the 1980–2011 period with a value close to 1.0 (0.7 to 1.3) W m–2. The major contribution to the uncertainties in the time evolution of the anthropogenic forcing is associated with the aerosols (see {Chapters.8.8_5.8_5_1 Section 8.5.1}). Despite this, anthropogenic ERF is very likely considerably more positive than the natural RF over the decadal time periods since 1950. This is in particular the case after 1980, where satellite data are available that provide important measurements to constrain the natural RF mechanisms (e.g., the volcanic RF change between 2007–2011 and 1978–1982 is 0.06 W m–2 and the representative change in solar irradiance over the 1980–2011 period is –0.06 W m–2) with total natural RF of 0.0 (-0.1 to +0.1) W m–2.

{image:'Figure_8_20}
