index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.5.2
title: 13.5.2 - Semi-Empirical Projections for the 21st Century

The development of semi-empirical models (SEMs) was motivated by two problems. First, process-based modelling was incomplete in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} because of the unavailability of ice-sheet dynamical models which could be used to simulate the observed recent accelerations in ice flow and make {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} with confidence ({cite.13.'Meehl_et_al_2007}) (Sections {Chapters.13.13_1.13_1_4.13_1_4_1 13.1.4.1}, {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 13.4.3.2} and {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 13.4.4.2}). Second, in all previous IPCC assessments, observed GMSL rise during the 20th century could not be completely accounted for by the contributions to GMSL from {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion thermal expansion}, glaciers and ice sheets. For example, the AR4 assessed the mean observational rate for 1961–2003 as 1.8 ± 0.5 mm yr–1, and the sum of contributions as 1.1 ± 0.5 mm yr–1 ({cite.13.'Bindoff_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Hegerl_et_al_2007}). With the central estimates, only about 60% of observed sea level rise was thus explained, and the potential implication was that projections using process-based models which reproduce only those known contributions would underestimate future sea level rise ({cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007a}; {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2009}; {cite.13.'Grinsted_et_al_2010}). SEMs do not aim to solve the two problems that motivated their development, but instead provide an alternative approach for projecting GMSL.

The semi-empirical approach regards a change in sea level as an integrated response of the entire climate system, reflecting changes in the dynamics and thermodynamics of the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}, ocean and {Glossary.*Cryosphere cryosphere}; it does not explicitly attribute sea level rise to its individual physical components. SEMs use simple physically motivated relationships, with various analytical formulations and parameters determined from observational time series, to predict GMSL for the 21st century ({'Figure_13_12 Figure 13.12} and {'Table_13_6 Table 13.6}) and beyond, from either global mean SAT ({cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007a}; {cite.13.'Horton_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Vermeer_and_Rahmstorf_2009}; {cite.13.'Grinsted_et_al_2010}; {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b}) or RF ({cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2009}; 2010, 2012a).

{image:'Figure_13_12}

{table:'Table_13_6}

SEMs are designed to reproduce the observed sea level record over their period of calibration, as this provides them with model parameters needed to make projections ({cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007a}; {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2009}; {cite.13.'Vermeer_and_Rahmstorf_2009}; {cite.13.'Grinsted_et_al_2010}). A test of the predictive skill of the models requires simulating a part of the observed record that has not been used for calibration. For instance, {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007b Rahmstorf (2007b)} calibrated for 1880–1940 and {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} 1940–2000, obtaining results within 0.02 m of observed. {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2012b Jevrejeva et al. (2012b)} calibrated up to 1950 and predicted 0.03 m (about 25%) less than observed for 1950–2009, and 3.8 mm yr–1 for 1993–2010, which is about 20% more than observed.

The GMSL estimates used for calibrating the SEMs are based on the existing sparse network of long tide-gauge records, and are thus uncertain, especially before the late 19th century; these {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} are reflected in the observational estimates of the rate of GMSL rise (Sections {Chapters.3.3_7 3.7} and {Chapters.13.13_2.13_2_2 13.2.2}). Consequently, the projections may be sensitive to the statistical treatment of the temporal variability in the instrumental record of {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} ({cite.13.'Holgate_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007b}; {cite.13.'Schmith_et_al_2007}). {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b Rahmstorf et al. (2012b)} reported that GMSL projections for the RCP4.5 scenario for 2100 ({'Table_13_6 Table 13.6}) varied by ±0.04 m when the embedding dimension used for temporal smoothing during the calibration was varied within a range of 0 to 25 years.

Furthermore, there is some sensitivity to the choice of data sets used for calibration. For instance, when calibrated up to 1960 and used to predict 1961–2003, the model of {cite.13.'Bittermann_et_al_2013 Bittermann et al. (2013)} overestimates the GMSL data set of {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2008 Jevrejeva et al. (2008)} by 75%, but makes an accurate estimate for the {cite.13.'Church_and_White_2011 Church and White (2011)} data set, although these two data sets have similar rates of sea level rise in the predicted period. The central projections of {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b Rahmstorf et al. (2012b)} for 2100 under RCP4.5 ({'Table_13_6 Table 13.6}) for calibration with the GMSL data set of {cite.13.'Church_and_White_2006 Church and White (2006)} are about 0.2 m more than for calibration with the {cite.13.'Church_and_White_2011 Church and White (2011)} data set, although the two Church and White (2006, 2011) data sets differ at all times by less than one standard deviation. The ranges of the projections by {cite.13.'Grinsted_et_al_2010 Grinsted et al. (2010)} and Jevrejeva et al. (2010, 2012a, 2012b) allow for the uncertainty in the GMSL reconstructions through the use of an uncertainty covariance matrix in determining the model parameters. {cite.13.'Grinsted_et_al_2010 Grinsted et al. (2010)} also investigated the sensitivity to the temperature data set used as predictor, and {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2010 Jevrejeva et al. (2010)} investigated the sensitivity to RF as predictor ({'Table_13_6 Table 13.6}). In the latter case, three data sets gave median projections under RCP4.5 for 2100 within a range of about ±0.20 m.

SEM projections will be biased unless contributions to past GMSL rise which correlate with but are not physically related to contemporary changes in the predictor variable (either global mean SAT change or RF) are subtracted from the observational sea level record before the calibration ({cite.13.'Vermeer_and_Rahmstorf_2009}; {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2012b}; {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b}; Orlić and Pasarić, 2013). These include groundwater depletion due to {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} intervention and storage of water by dams ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_4 Section 13.3.4}), ongoing adjustment of the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets to climate change in previous centuries and millennia ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_6 Section 13.3.6}), and the effects of internally generated {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} variability on glaciers ({cite.13.'Marzeion_et_al_2012a}; {cite.13.'Church_et_al_2013}, Sections {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_2.13_3_2_2 13.3.2.2} and {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_6 13.3.6}) and ice sheets ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_3.13_3_3_2 Section 13.3.3.2}). For instance, {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2012b Jevrejeva et al. (2012b)} found that their median projections for 2100 were reduced by 0.02 to 0.10 m by excluding some such contributions.

Making projections with a SEM assumes that {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} in the future will have the same relationship as it has had in the past to RF or {Topics.*Surface_Temperature global mean temperature} change. The appropriate choice for the formulation of the SEM may depend on the nature of the climate {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} and the time scale, and potentially nonlinear physical processes may not scale in the future in ways which can be calibrated from the past (von Storch et al., 2008; {cite.13.'Vermeer_and_Rahmstorf_2009}; {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b}; Orlić and Pasarić, 2013). Two such effects that could lead to overestimated or underestimated projections by SEMs have been discussed in the literature.

First, {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} indicate that the ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} efficiency tends to decline as warming continues and heat penetrates more deeply ({cite.13.'Gregory_and_Forster_2008}). A linear scaling of the rate of global ocean heat uptake with global SAT determined from the past, as proposed by {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007a Rahmstorf (2007a)}, will thus overestimate future time-integrated heat content change and the consequent global ocean thermal expansion on a century time scale (Orlić and Pasarić, 2013). {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007a Rahmstorf (2007a)} found that the linear scaling overestimated by 0.12 m (about 30%) the thermal expansion simulated by a {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} with a 3D ocean from 1990 to 2100 under scenario SRES A1FI. Furthermore, the {cite.13.'Rahmstorf_2007a Rahmstorf (2007a)} model is inadequate for simulating sea level variations of the last millennium (von Storch et al., 2008), which arise predominantly from episodic volcanic forcing, rather than the sustained forcing on multi-decadal time scales for which it was intended. In both applications, the AOGCM behaviour is more accurately reproduced by taking into account the vertical profile of warming, at least by distinguishing the upper (mixed layer) and lower ({Glossary.*Thermocline thermocline}) layers ({cite.13.'Vermeer_and_Rahmstorf_2009}; {cite.13.'Held_et_al_2010}) ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_1 Section 13.4.1}), or by introducing a relaxation time scale for sea level rise ({cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2012b}).

Second, the sensitivity of glaciers to warming will tend to decrease as the area most prone to ablation and the remaining volume decrease, partly counteracted by lowering of the surface due to thinning ({cite.13.'Huss_et_al_2012}) {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_2 Section 13.4.2}). On the other hand, glaciers at high latitudes that currently have negligible surface melting will begin to ablate as the climate becomes warmer, tending to give an increase in sensitivity ({cite.13.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2012b}) ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_2 Section 13.4.2}). Estimating the balance of these two effects will require detailed modelling of {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} SMB. The absence of a multidecadal acceleration in the rate of glacier mass loss in observations of the 20th and simulations of the 21st centuries ({Chapters.4.4_3.4_3_3 Section 4.3.3}) ({cite.13.'Radic_and_Hock_2010}; {cite.13.'Marzeion_et_al_2012a}), despite rising global temperatures, suggests that the reduction in sensitivity may dominate ({cite.13.'Gregory_et_al_2013b}).
