index: hide
name: Relative Velocities and Classical Relativity

When adding velocities, we have been careful to specify that the  *velocity is relative to some reference frame*. These velocities are called  **relative velocities**. For example, the velocity of an airplane relative to an air mass is different from its velocity relative to the ground. Both are quite different from the velocity of an airplane relative to its passengers (which should be close to zero). Relative velocities are one aspect of  **relativity**, which is defined to be the study of how different observers moving relative to each other measure the same phenomenon.

Nearly everyone has heard of relativity and immediately associates it with Albert Einstein (1879–1955), the greatest physicist of the 20th century. Einstein revolutionized our view of nature with his  *modern* theory of relativity, which we shall study in later chapters. The relative velocities in this section are actually aspects of classical relativity, first discussed correctly by Galileo and Isaac Newton.  **Classical relativity** is limited to situations where speeds are less than about 1% of the speed of light—that is, less than <math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><mtext>3,000 km/s</mtext></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;&quot;3,000 km/s&quot;&#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>. Most things we encounter in daily life move slower than this speed.

Let us consider an example of what two different observers see in a situation analyzed long ago by Galileo. Suppose a sailor at the top of a mast on a moving ship drops his binoculars. Where will it hit the deck? Will it hit at the base of the mast, or will it hit behind the mast because the ship is moving forward? The answer is that if air resistance is negligible, the binoculars will hit at the base of the mast at a point directly below its point of release. Now let us consider what two different observers see when the binoculars drop. One observer is on the ship and the other on shore. The binoculars have no horizontal velocity relative to the observer on the ship, and so he sees them fall straight down the mast. (See {'Figure_3_5_5a Figure 3.5.5a}.) To the observer on shore, the binoculars and the ship have the  *same* horizontal velocity, so both move the same distance forward while the binoculars are falling. This observer sees the curved path shown in {'Figure_3_5_5a Figure 3.5.5a}. Although the paths look different to the different observers, each sees the same result—the binoculars hit at the base of the mast and not behind it. To get the correct description, it is crucial to correctly specify the velocities relative to the observer.


{image:'Figure_3_5_5a}
        
