index: hide
name: Outcomes and the Type I and Type II Errors - Introduction

When you perform a hypothesis test, there are four possible outcomes depending on the actual truth (or falseness) of the null hypothesis  *H0* and the decision to reject or not. The outcomes are summarized in the following table:


| ACTION |  *H0* IS ACTUALLY | ... |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  | True | False |
|  *Do not reject H0* | Correct Outcome | Type II error |
|  *Reject H0* | Type I Error | Correct Outcome |
    

The four possible outcomes in the table are:
    

  1. The decision is  *not to reject H0* when  *H0 is true (correct decision).*
  2. The decision is to  *reject H0* when  *H0 is true* (incorrect decision known as a **Type I error**).
  3. The decision is  *not to reject H0* when, in fact,  *H0 is false* (incorrect decision known as a  **Type II error**).
  4. The decision is to  *reject H0* when  *H0 is false* ( *correct decision* whose probability is called the  *Power of the Test*).

Each of the errors occurs with a particular probability. The Greek letters  *α* and  *β* represent the probabilities.

 *α* = probability of a Type I error =  *P(Type I error)* = probability of rejecting the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is true.

 *β* = probability of a Type II error =  *P(Type II error)* = probability of not rejecting the null hypothesis when the null hypothesis is false.

 *α* and  *β* should be as small as possible because they are probabilities of errors. They are rarely zero.

The Power of the Test is 1 –  *β*. Ideally, we want a high power that is as close to one as possible. Increasing the sample size can increase the Power of the Test.

The following are examples of Type I and Type II errors.
