index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.5.5.2
title: 12.5.5.2 - The Atlantic Meridional Overturning

{Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs} for which the stability has been systematically assessed by suitably designed hysteresis experiments robustly show a threshold beyond which the Atlantic {Glossary.*Thermohaline_circulation thermohaline circulation} cannot be sustained ({cite.12.'Rahmstorf_et_al_2005}). This is also the case for one low-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESM} ({cite.12.'Hawkins_et_al_2011}). However, proximity to this threshold is highly model dependent and influenced by factors that are currently poorly understood. There is some indication that the CMIP3 {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} may generally overestimate the stability of the Atlantic Ocean circulation ({cite.12.'Hofmann_and_Rahmstorf_2009}; {cite.12.'Drijfhout_et_al_2010}). In particular, De Vries and Weber (2005), {cite.12.'Dijkstra_2007 Dijkstra (2007)}, {cite.12.'Weber_et_al_2007 Weber et al. (2007)}, {cite.12.'Huisman_et_al_2010 Huisman et al. (2010)}, {cite.12.'Drijfhout_et_al_2010 Drijfhout et al. (2010)} and {cite.12.'Hawkins_et_al_2011 Hawkins et al. (2011)} suggest that the sign of net freshwater flux into the Atlantic transported through its southern boundary via the overturning circulation determines whether or not the AMOC is in a mono-stable or bi-stable state. For the pre-industrial control climate of most of the CMIP3 models, {cite.12.'Drijfhout_et_al_2010 Drijfhout et al. (2010)} found that the salt flux was negative (implying a positive freshwater flux), indicating that they were in a mono-stable regime. However, this is not the case in the CMIP5 models where {cite.12.'Weaver_et_al_2012 Weaver et al. (2012)} found that the majority of the models were in a bi-stable regime during RCP integrations. Observations suggest that the present day ocean is in a bi-stable regime, thereby allowing for multiple equilibria and a stable ‘off’ state of the AMOC ({cite.12.'Bryden_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Hawkins_et_al_2011}).

In addition to the main threshold for a complete breakdown of the circulation, others may exist that involve more limited changes, such as a cessation of Labrador Sea deep water formation ({cite.12.'Wood_et_al_1999}). Rapid melting of the Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} causes increases in freshwater {Glossary.*Runoff runoff}, potentially weakening the AMOC. None of the CMIP5 simulations include an interactive ice sheet component. However, {cite.12.'Jungclaus_et_al_2006 Jungclaus et al. (2006)}, {cite.12.'Mikolajewicz_et_al_2007 Mikolajewicz et al. (2007)}, {cite.12.'Driesschaert_et_al_2007 Driesschaert et al. (2007)} and {cite.12.'Hu_et_al_2009 Hu et al. (2009)} found only a slight temporary effect of increased melt water fluxes on the AMOC, that was either small compared to the effect of enhanced poleward atmospheric moisture transport or only noticeable in the most extreme {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}.

Although many more model simulations have been conducted since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} under a wide range of {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} scenarios, {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of the AMOC behaviour have not changed. Based on the available CMIP5 models, EMICs and the literature, it remains very likely that the AMOC will weaken over the 21st century relative to pre-industrial. Best estimates and ranges for the reduction from CMIP5 are 11% (1 to 24%) in {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} and 34% (12 to 54%) in {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} ({cite.12.'Weaver_et_al_2012}) (see {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_7.12_4_7_2 Section 12.4.7.2}, {'Figure_12_35 Figure 12.35}). But there is low confidence in the magnitude of the weakening. {cite.12.'Drijfhout_et_al_2012 Drijfhout et al. (2012)} show that the AMOC decrease per degree {Topics.*Surface_Temperature global mean temperature} rise varies from 1.5 to 1.9 Sv (106 m3 s–1) for the CMIP5 multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} members they considered depending on the scenario, but that the standard deviation in this regression is almost half the signal.

The FIO-ESM model shows cooling over much of the NH that may be related to a strong reduction of the AMOC in all RCP scenarios (even RCP2.6), but the limited output available from the model precludes an assessment of the response and realism of this response. Hence it is not included the overall assessment of the {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} of abrupt changes.

It is unlikely that the AMOC will collapse beyond the end of the 21st century for the scenarios considered but a collapse beyond the 21st century for large sustained warming cannot be excluded. There is low confidence in assessing the evolution of the AMOC beyond the 21st century. Two of the CMIP5 models revealed an eventual slowdown of the AMOC to an off state ({'Figure_12_35 Figure 12.35}). But this did not occur abruptly.

As assessed by {cite.12.'Delworth_et_al_2008 Delworth et al. (2008)}, for an abrupt transition of the AMOC to occur, the sensitivity of the AMOC to forcing would have to be far greater that seen in current models. Alternatively, significant ablation of the Greenland ice sheet greatly exceeding even the most aggressive of current projections would be required ({cite.12.'Swingedouw_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Hu_et_al_2009}). While neither possibility can be excluded entirely, it is unlikely that the AMOC will collapse beyond the end of the 21st century because of global warming based on the models and range of scenarios considered.
