index: hide
public: ar5-Appendix-3.A
name: Appendix 3.A
title: Appendix 3.A - Appendix 3.A: Availability of Observations for Assessment of Change in the Oceans

Sampling of the ocean has been highly heterogeneous since 1950. The coverage in space, time, depth and number of ocean variables has evolved over time, reflecting changes in technology and the contribution of major oceanographic research programs. Changes in the distribution and quality of ocean measurements over time complicate efforts to detect and interpret change in the ocean. This Appendix provides some illustrative examples of the evolution of the ocean observing system on which the assessment of ocean change in this chapter is based. A more comprehensive discussion of ocean sampling is provided in the literature cited in this chapter. Sampling of sea {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} is discussed in {Chapters.2 Chapter 2}.

3.A.1 Subsurface Ocean Temperature and Heat Content

Temperature is the best-sampled oceanographic variable, but even for temperature sampling is far from ideal or complete. Early oceanographic expeditions included the Challenger voyage around the world in the 1870s, the Meteor survey of the Atlantic in the 1920s, and the Discovery investigations of the Southern Ocean starting in the 1920s. More frequent basin-scale sampling commenced in the late 1950s with the International Geophysical Year. The number of profiles available for assessment of changes in temperature and ocean heat content in the upper 700 m generally increases with time since the 1950s (Figure 3.A.1). Near-global coverage of the upper half of the ocean was not achieved until the widespread deployment of Argo profiling floats in the 2000s (Figure 3.A.2).

{image:'Figure_3_A_1}

Early measurements of temperature were made using reversing thermometers and Nansen bottles that were lowered from ships on station (not moving). Starting in the 1960s conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) instruments with Niskin bottles gradually gained dominance for high-quality data and deep data collected on station during oceanographic cruises. From at least 1950 through about 1970, most subsurface measurements of ocean temperature were made with mechanical bathythermographs, an advance because these instruments could be deployed from a moving ship, albeit a slowly moving one, but these casts were generally limited to depths shallower than 250 m. Expendable bathythermographs (XBTs) that could be deployed from a rapidly moving ship and sampled to 400 m came into widespread use in the late 1960s, and those that sampled to 700 m became predominant in the 1990s, greatly expanding oceanographic sampling. Starting in 2000, Argo floats began sampling the ocean to a target depth of 2000 m, building to near-global coverage by 2005. Prior to the Argo era, sampling of the ocean below 700 m was almost solely achieved from ships on station deploying Nansen bottles with reversing thermometers or later using CTDs with Niskin bottles. Today ship-based station data still dominates sampling for waters deeper than 2000 m depth (the maximum depth currently sampled by Argo floats). An illustration of the limited data available for assessment of change in the deep ocean is provided in {'Figure_3_3 Figure 3.3}, which shows locations of full-depth oceanographic CTD sections that have been occupied more than once since about 1980. The depth coverage of the ocean observing system has changed over time (Figure 3A.2, top panel) with a hemispheric bias (Figure 3.A.2, middle and lower panels). The Northern Hemisphere (NH) has been consistently better sampled than the Southern Hemisphere (SH) prior to the Argo era.

{image:'Figure_3_A_2}

3.A.2 Salinity

Measurements of subsurface salinity have relied almost solely on data collected from bottle and CTD casts from ships on station (and, more recently, using profiling floats that sample both temperature and salinity with CTDs). Hence fewer measurements of salinity are available than of temperature (by roughly a factor of 3). However, the evolution with time of subsurface salinity sampling shows a progression similar to that of temperature (Figure 3.A.3). Coverage generally improves with time, but there is a strong NH bias, particularly in the North Atlantic. A shift in focus from basin-to-basin as major field programs were carried out is evident. Near-global coverage of ocean salinity above 2000 m was not achieved until after 2005, when the Argo array approached full deployment. For depths greater than 2000 m, outside the relatively well sampled North Atlantic, information on changes in ocean salinity is largely restricted to the repeat hydrographic transects (see {'Figure_3_3 Figure 3.3}).

{image:'Figure_3_A_3}

3.A.3 Sea Level

Direct observations of {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} are made using tide gauges since the 1700s and high-precision satellite altimeters since 1992. {Glossary.*Tide_gauge Tide gauge} measurements are limited to coastlines and islands. There are intermittent records of sea level at Amsterdam from 1700 and at three more sites in Northern Europe starting after 1770. By the late 1800s, more tide gauges were being operated in Northern Europe and in North America, as well as in Australia and New Zealand (Figure 3.A.4). It was not until the late 1970s to early 1980s that a majority of deepocean islands had operating tide gauges suitable for climate studies. Although tide gauges have continued to be deployed since 1990, they have been complemented by continuous, near-global measurements of sea level from space since 1992. Measurements are made along the satellite’s ground track on the Earth surface, typically averaged over approximately 7 km to reduce noise and improve precision. The maximum latitude extent of the measurement is limited by the inclination of the orbital plane, which has been between ±66° for the TOPEX/ Poseidon and Jason series of altimeters. The spacing between ground tracks is much greater than the spacing along the ground track. As an example, the groundtrack separation of the TOPEX/Poseidon-type of orbits is about 300 km at the equator, but is less than 100 km at latitudes poleward of 50° latitude. On average, the spacing is between 100 and 200 km. Satellites are limited in the temporal sampling as well due to the orbit configuration. For a specific location along a groundtrack, the return time for a TOPEX/Poseidon-type of orbit is 9.9 days. If one relaxes the requirement to a measurement within a 300 km radius, the return time can be as short as a few hours at high latitudes to about 3 days at the equator. As noted in {Chapters.3.3_6 Section 3.6}, satellite altimeter observations of sea level are also an important tool for observing large-scale ocean circulation.

{image:'Figure_3_A_4}

3.A.4 Biogeochemistry

The data available for assessing changes in biogeochemical parameters is less complete than for temperature and salinity. The global data base on which the Global Ocean Data Analysis Project (GLODAP, {cite.3.'Key_et_al_2004}) ocean carbon inventory is based is illustrated in Figure 3.A.5. Changes in the ocean inventory of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} have been estimated using measurements of carbon parameters and other tracers collected at these roughly 12,000 stations, mostly occupied since 1990. The majority of these stations extend through the full water depth. A subset of these stations have been repeated one or more times. The distribution of oxygen measurements at 300 m depth in 10-year periods since 1960 is shown in Figure 3.A.6, as used in the global study of {cite.3.'Stramma_et_al_2012 Stramma et al. (2012)}. As for temperature and salinity, the sampling is heterogeneous, coverage generally improves with time but shifts between basins as major field programs come and go, and tends to be concentrated in the NH.

{image:'Figure_3_A_5}

{image:'Figure_3_A_6}
