index: hide
name: Basic Photosynthetic Structures

In plants, photosynthesis generally takes place in leaves, which consist of several layers of cells. The process of photosynthesis occurs in a middle layer called the  **mesophyll**. The gas exchange of carbon dioxide and oxygen occurs through small, regulated openings called  **stomata** (singular: stoma), which also play roles in the regulation of gas exchange and water balance. The stomata are typically located on the underside of the leaf, which helps to minimize water loss due to high temperatures on the upper surface of the leaf. Each stoma is flanked by guard cells that regulate the opening and closing of the stomata by swelling or shrinking in response to osmotic changes.

In all autotrophic eukaryotes, photosynthesis takes place inside an organelle called a  **chloroplast**. For plants, chloroplast-containing cells exist mostly in the mesophyll. Chloroplasts have a double membrane envelope (composed of an outer membrane and an inner membrane), and are ancestrally derived from ancient free-living cyanobacteria. Within the chloroplast are stacked, disc-shaped structures called  **thylakoids**. Embedded in the thylakoid membrane is chlorophyll, a  **pigment** (molecule that absorbs light) responsible for the initial interaction between light and plant material, and numerous proteins that make up the electron transport chain. The thylakoid membrane encloses an internal space called the  **thylakoid lumen**. As shown in , a stack of thylakoids is called a  **granum**, and the liquid-filled space surrounding the granum is called  **stroma** or “bed” (not to be confused with stoma or “mouth,” an opening on the leaf epidermis).
