index: hide
name: Variation in Covalent Radius

The quantum mechanical picture makes it difficult to establish a definite size of an atom. However, there are several practical ways to define the radius of atoms and, thus, to determine their relative sizes that give roughly similar values. We will use the  **covalent radius** ({'Figure_6_5_CovalradiT Figure 6.5.CovalradiT}), which is defined as one-half the distance between the nuclei of two identical atoms when they are joined by a covalent bond (this measurement is possible because atoms within molecules still retain much of their atomic identity). We know that as we scan down a group, the principal quantum number,  *n*, increases by one for each element. Thus, the electrons are being added to a region of space that is increasingly distant from the nucleus. Consequently, the size of the atom (and its covalent radius) must increase as we increase the distance of the outermost electrons from the nucleus. This trend is illustrated for the covalent radii of the halogens in  and {'Figure_6_5_CovalradiT Figure 6.5.CovalradiT}. The trends for the entire periodic table can be seen in {'Figure_6_5_CovalradiT Figure 6.5.CovalradiT}.


****

| Atom | Covalent radius (pm) | Nuclear charge |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| F | 64 | +9 |
| Cl | 99 | +17 |
| Br | 114 | +35 |
| I | 133 | +53 |
| At | 148 | +85 |
    


{image:'Figure_6_5_CovalradiT}
        


{image:'Figure_6_5_Radiigraph}
        

As shown in {'Figure_6_5_Radiigraph Figure 6.5.Radiigraph}, as we move across a period from left to right, we generally find that each element has a smaller covalent radius than the element preceding it. This might seem counterintuitive because it implies that atoms with more electrons have a smaller atomic radius. This can be explained with the concept of  **effective nuclear charge, Zeff**. This is the pull exerted on a specific electron by the nucleus, taking into account any electron–electron repulsions. For hydrogen, there is only one electron and so the nuclear charge ( *Z*) and the effective nuclear charge ( *Z*<sub>eff</sub>) are equal. For all other atoms, the inner electrons partially  *shield* the outer electrons from the pull of the nucleus, and thus:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><msub><mi>Z</mi><mrow><mtext>eff</mtext></mrow></msub><mo>=</mo><mi>Z</mi><mo>−</mo><mi>s</mi><mi>h</mi><mi>i</mi><mi>e</mi><mi>l</mi><mi>d</mi><mi>i</mi><mi>n</mi><mi>g</mi></mrow></math>

Shielding is determined by the probability of another electron being between the electron of interest and the nucleus, as well as by the electron–electron repulsions the electron of interest encounters. Core electrons are adept at shielding, while electrons in the same valence shell do not block the nuclear attraction experienced by each other as efficiently. Thus, each time we move from one element to the next across a period,  *Z* increases by one, but the shielding increases only slightly. Thus,  *Z*<sub>eff</sub> increases as we move from left to right across a period. The stronger pull (higher effective nuclear charge) experienced by electrons on the right side of the periodic table draws them closer to the nucleus, making the covalent radii smaller.

Thus, as we would expect, the outermost or valence electrons are easiest to remove because they have the highest energies, are shielded more, and are farthest from the nucleus. As a general rule, when the representative elements form cations, they do so by the loss of the  *ns* or  *np* electrons that were added last in the Aufbau process. The transition elements, on the other hand, lose the  *ns* electrons before they begin to lose the ( *n* – 1) *d* electrons, even though the  *ns* electrons are added first, according to the Aufbau principle.
