index: hide
name: Solar Dependence and Food Production

Some organisms can carry out photosynthesis, whereas others cannot. An  **autotroph** is an organism that can produce its own food. The Greek roots of the word  *autotroph* mean “self” ( *auto*) “feeder” ( *troph*). Plants are the best-known autotrophs, but others exist, including certain types of bacteria and algae ({'Figure_5_1_1abc Figure 5.1.1abc}). Oceanic algae contribute enormous quantities of food and oxygen to global food chains. Plants are also  **photoautotrophs**, a type of autotroph that uses sunlight and carbon from carbon dioxide to synthesize chemical energy in the form of carbohydrates. All organisms carrying out photosynthesis require sunlight.


{image:'Figure_5_1_1abc}
        

 **Heterotrophs** are organisms incapable of photosynthesis that must therefore obtain energy and carbon from food by consuming other organisms. The Greek roots of the word  *heterotroph* mean “other” ( *hetero*) “feeder” ( *troph*), meaning that their food comes from other organisms. Even if the food organism is another animal, this food traces its origins back to autotrophs and the process of photosynthesis. Humans are heterotrophs, as are all animals. Heterotrophs depend on autotrophs, either directly or indirectly. Deer and wolves are heterotrophs. A deer obtains energy by eating plants. A wolf eating a deer obtains energy that originally came from the plants eaten by that deer. The energy in the plant came from photosynthesis, and therefore it is the only autotroph in this example ({'Figure_5_1_2 Figure 5.1.2}). Using this reasoning, all food eaten by humans also links back to autotrophs that carry out photosynthesis.


{image:'Figure_5_1_2}
        
