index: hide
name: Transcription: from DNA to mRNA

Both prokaryotes and eukaryotes perform fundamentally the same process of transcription, with the important difference of the membrane-bound nucleus in eukaryotes. With the genes bound in the nucleus, transcription occurs in the nucleus of the cell and the mRNA transcript must be transported to the cytoplasm. The prokaryotes, which include bacteria and archaea, lack membrane-bound nuclei and other organelles, and transcription occurs in the cytoplasm of the cell. In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, transcription occurs in three main stages: initiation, elongation, and termination.

## Initiation

Transcription requires the DNA double helix to partially unwind in the region of mRNA synthesis. The region of unwinding is called a  **transcription bubble**. The DNA sequence onto which the proteins and enzymes involved in transcription bind to initiate the process is called a  **promoter**. In most cases, promoters exist upstream of the genes they regulate. The specific sequence of a promoter is very important because it determines whether the corresponding gene is transcribed all of the time, some of the time, or hardly at all ({'Figure_9_3_2 Figure 9.3.2}).


{image:'Figure_9_3_2}
        

## Elongation

Transcription always proceeds from one of the two DNA strands, which is called the  **template strand**. The mRNA product is complementary to the template strand and is almost identical to the other DNA strand, called the  **nontemplate strand**, with the exception that RNA contains a uracil (U) in place of the thymine (T) found in DNA. During elongation, an enzyme called  **RNA polymerase** proceeds along the DNA template adding nucleotides by base pairing with the DNA template in a manner similar to DNA replication, with the difference that an RNA strand is being synthesized that does not remain bound to the DNA template. As elongation proceeds, the DNA is continuously unwound ahead of the core enzyme and rewound behind it ({'Figure_9_3_3 Figure 9.3.3}).


{image:'Figure_9_3_3}
        

## Termination

Once a gene is transcribed, the prokaryotic polymerase needs to be instructed to dissociate from the DNA template and liberate the newly made mRNA. Depending on the gene being transcribed, there are two kinds of termination signals, but both involve repeated nucleotide sequences in the DNA template that result in RNA polymerase stalling, leaving the DNA template, and freeing the mRNA transcript.

On termination, the process of transcription is complete. In a prokaryotic cell, by the time termination occurs, the transcript would already have been used to partially synthesize numerous copies of the encoded protein because these processes can occur concurrently using multiple ribosomes (polyribosomes) ({'Figure_9_3_4 Figure 9.3.4}). In contrast, the presence of a nucleus in eukaryotic cells precludes simultaneous transcription and translation.


{image:'Figure_9_3_4}
        
