index: hide
name: Cell Sorting Using Immunofluorescence

The flow cytometer and immunofluorescence can also be modified to sort cells from a single sample into purified subpopulations of cells for research purposes. This modification of the flow cytometer is called a  **fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS)**. In a FACS, fluorescence by a cell induces the device to put a charge on a droplet of the transporting fluid containing that cell. The charge is specific to the wavelength of the fluorescent light, which allows for differential sorting by those different charges. The sorting is accomplished by an electrostatic deflector that moves the charged droplet containing the cell into one collecting vessel or another. The process results in highly purified subpopulations of cells.

One limitation of a FACS is that it only works on isolated cells. Thus, the method would work in sorting white blood cells, since they exist as isolated cells. But for cells in a tissue, flow cytometry can only be applied if we can excise the tissue and separate it into single cells (using proteases to cleave cell-cell adhesion molecules) without disrupting cell integrity. This method may be used on tumors, but more often, immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry are used to study cells in tissues.

 compares the mechanisms of the fluorescent antibody techniques discussed in this section.


****

| Type of Assay | Mechanism | Examples |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Direct fluorescent antibody (DFA) | Uses fluorogen-antibody conjugates to label bacteria from patient samples | Visualizing  *Legionella pneumophila* from a throat swab |
| Indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) | Detects disease-specific antibodies in patent serum | Diagnosing syphilis; detecting antinuclear antibodies (ANA) for lupus and other autoimmune diseases |
| Flow cytometry | Labels cell membranes with fluorogen-antibody conjugate markers excited by a laser; machine counts the cell and records the relative fluorescence | Counting the number of fluorescently labeled CD4 or CD8 cells in a sample |
| Fluorescence activated cell sorter (FACS) | Form of flow cytometry that both counts cells and physically separates them into pools of high and low fluorescence cells | Sorting cancer cells |
    
