index: hide
name: Indirect Fluorescent Antibody Techniques

 **Indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) tests** ({'Figure_20_5_IFA Figure 20.5.IFA}) are used to look for antibodies in patient serum. For example, an IFA test for the diagnosis of  **syphilis** uses  *T. pallidum* cells isolated from a lab animal (the bacteria cannot be grown on lab media) and a smear prepared on a glass slide. Patient serum is spread over the smear and anti-treponemal antibodies, if present, are allowed to bind. The serum is washed off and a secondary antibody added. The  **secondary antibody** is an antihuman immunoglobulin conjugated to a  **fluorogen**. On examination, the  *T. pallidum* bacteria will only be visible if they have been bound by the antibodies from the patient’s serum.

The IFA test for syphilis provides an important complement to the  **VDRL test** discussed in <link:>. The VDRL is more likely to generate false-positive reactions than the IFA test; however, the VDRL is a better test for determining whether an infection is currently active.

IFA tests are also useful for the diagnosis of autoimmune diseases. For example,  **systemic lupus erythematosus** (SLE) (see <link:>) is characterized by elevated expression levels of  **antinuclear antibodies** (ANA). These autoantibodies can be expressed against a variety of DNA-binding proteins and even against DNA itself. Because autoimmunity is often difficult to diagnose, especially early in disease progression, testing for ANA can be a valuable clue in making a diagnosis and starting appropriate treatment.

The IFA for ANA begins by fixing cells grown in culture to a glass slide and making them permeable to antibody. The slides are then incubated with serial dilutions of serum from the patient. After incubation, the slide is washed to remove unbound proteins, and the fluorescent antibody (antihuman IgG conjugated to a fluorogen) added. After an incubation and wash, the cells can be examined for fluorescence evident around the nucleus ({'Figure_20_5_ANA Figure 20.5.ANA}). The  **titer** of ANA in the serum is determined by the highest dilution showing fluorescence. Because many healthy people express ANA, the American College of Rheumatology recommends that the titer must be at least 1:40 in the presence of symptoms involving two or more organ systems to be considered indicative of SLE.


{image:'Figure_20_5_IFA}
        


{image:'Figure_20_5_ANA}
        
