index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Heat is a widely used and highly effective method for controlling microbial growth.
  *  **Dry-heat sterilization** protocols are used commonly in aseptic techniques in the laboratory. However,  **moist-heat sterilization** is typically the more effective protocol because it penetrates cells better than dry heat does.
  *  **Pasteurization** is used to kill pathogens and reduce the number of microbes that cause food spoilage.  **High-temperature, short-time pasteurization** is commonly used to pasteurize milk that will be refrigerated;  **ultra-high temperature pasteurization** can be used to pasteurize milk for long-term storage without refrigeration.
  * Refrigeration slows microbial growth; freezing stops growth, killing some organisms. Laboratory and medical specimens may be frozen on dry ice or at ultra-low temperatures for storage and transport.
  * High-pressure processing can be used to kill microbes in food. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy to increase oxygen saturation has also been used to treat certain infections.
  *  **Desiccation** has long been used to preserve foods and is accelerated through the addition of salt or sugar, which decrease water activity in foods.
  *  **Lyophilization** combines cold exposure and desiccation for the long-term storage of foods and laboratory materials, but microbes remain and can be rehydrated.
  *  **Ionizing radiation**, including gamma irradiation, is an effective way to sterilize heat-sensitive and packaged materials.  **Nonionizing radiation**, like ultraviolet light, is unable to penetrate surfaces but is useful for surface sterilization.
  *  **HEPA** filtration is commonly used in hospital ventilation systems and biological safety cabinets in laboratories to prevent transmission of airborne microbes.  **Membrane filtration** is commonly used to remove bacteria from heat-sensitive solutions.
