index: hide
name: Pseudomonas Infections of the Skin

#  *Pseudomonas* Infections of the Skin

Another important skin pathogen is  **Pseudomonas aeruginosa**, a gram-negative, oxidase-positive, aerobic bacillus that is commonly found in water and soil as well as on human skin.  *P. aeruginosa* is a common cause of opportunistic infections of wounds and burns. It can also cause  **hot tub rash**, a condition characterized by folliculitis that frequently afflicts users of pools and hot tubs (recall the Clinical Focus case in ).  *P. aeruginosa* is also the cause of  **otitis externa** ( **swimmer’s ear**), an infection of the ear canal that causes itching, redness, and discomfort, and can progress to fever, pain, and swelling ({'Figure_21_2_folliculit Figure 21.2.folliculit}).


{image:'Figure_21_2_folliculit}
        

Wounds infected with  *P. aeruginosa* have a distinctive odor resembling grape soda or fresh corn tortillas. This odor is caused by the 2-aminoacetophenone that is used by  *P. aeruginosa* in quorum sensing and contributes to its pathogenicity. Wounds infected with certain strains of  *P. aeruginosa* also produce a blue-green pus due to the pigments  **pyocyanin** and  **pyoverdin**, which also contribute to its virulence. Pyocyanin and pyoverdin are  **siderophores** that help  *P. aeruginosa* survive in low-iron environments by enhancing iron uptake.  *P. aeruginosa* also produces several other virulence factors, including  **phospholipase C** (a hemolysin capable of breaking down red blood cells),  **exoenzyme S** (involved in adherence to epithelial cells), and  **exotoxin A** (capable of causing tissue necrosis). Other virulence factors include a slime that allows the bacterium to avoid being phagocytized,  **fimbriae** for adherence, and proteases that cause tissue damage.  *P. aeruginosa* can be detected through the use of  **cetrimide agar**, which is selective for  *Pseudomonas* species ({'Figure_21_2_Pseudomona Figure 21.2.Pseudomona}).


{image:'Figure_21_2_Pseudomona}
        

 *Pseudomonas* spp. tend to be resistant to most antibiotics. They often produce  **β-lactamases**, may have mutations affecting  **porins** (small cell wall channels) that affect antibiotic uptake, and may pump some antibiotics out of the cell, contributing to this resistance.  **Polymyxin B** and  **gentamicin** are effective, as are some  **fluoroquinolones**. Otitis externa is typically treated with ear drops containing acetic acid, antibacterials, and/or steroids to reduce inflammation; ear drops may also include antifungals because fungi can sometimes cause or contribute to otitis externa. Wound infections caused by  *Pseudomonas* spp. may be treated with topical antibiofilm agents that disrupt the formation of  **biofilms**.
