index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  *Staphylococcus* and  *Streptococcus* cause many different types of skin infections, many of which occur when bacteria breach the skin barrier through a cut or wound.
  *  *S. aureus* are frequently associated with purulent skin infections that manifest as  **folliculitis**,  **furuncles**, or  **carbuncles**.  *S. aureus* is also a leading cause of staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS).
  *  *S. aureus* is generally drug resistant and current MRSA strains are resistant to a wide range of antibiotics.
  * Community-acquired and hospital-acquired staphyloccocal infections are an ongoing problem because many people are asymptomatic carriers.
  *  **Group A streptococci (GAS)**,  *S. pyogenes*, is often responsible for cases of  **cellulitis**,  **erysipelas**, and  **erythema nosodum**. GAS are also one of many possible causes of  **necrotizing fasciitis**.
  *  *P. aeruginosa* is often responsible for infections of the skin and eyes, including wound and burn infections,  **hot tub rash**,  **otitis externa**, and bacterial  **keratitis**.
  *  **Acne** is a common skin condition that can become more inflammatory when  *Propionibacterium acnes* infects hair follicles and pores clogged with dead skin cells and sebum.
  * Cutaneous  **anthrax** occurs when  *Bacillus*  *anthracis* breaches the skin barrier. The infection results in a localized black  **eschar** on skin. Anthrax can be fatal if  *B.*  *anthracis* spreads to the bloodstream.
  * Common bacterial  **conjunctivitis** is often caused by  *Haemophilus*  *influenzae* and usually resolves on its own in a few days. More serious forms of conjunctivitis include gonococcal  **ophthalmia neonatorum**,  **inclusion conjunctivitis** (chlamydial), and  **trachoma**, all of which can lead to blindness if untreated.
  *  **Keratitis** is frequently caused by  *Staphylococcus epidermidis* and/or  *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, especially among contact lens users, and can lead to blindness.
  * Biofilms complicate the treatment of wound and eye infections because pathogens living in biofilms can be difficult to treat and eliminate.
