index: hide
name: Streptococcal Infections of the Skin

 *Streptococcus* are gram-positive cocci with a microscopic morphology that resembles chains of bacteria. Colonies are typically small (1–2 mm in diameter), translucent, entire edge, with a slightly raised elevation that can be either nonhemolytic, alpha-hemolytic, or beta-hemolytic when grown on blood agar ({'Figure_21_2_spyogenes Figure 21.2.spyogenes}). Additionally, they are facultative anaerobes that are catalase-negative.


{image:'Figure_21_2_spyogenes}
        

The genus  *Streptococcus* includes important pathogens that are categorized in serological  **Lancefield groups** based on the distinguishing characteristics of their surface carbohydrates. The most clinically important streptococcal species in humans is  *S. pyogenes*, also known as  **group A streptococcus (GAS)**.  *S. pyogenes* produces a variety of extracellular enzymes, including  **streptolysins** O and S,  **hyaluronidase**, and  **streptokinase**. These enzymes can aid in transmission and contribute to the inflammatory response. *S. pyogenes* also produces a capsule and  **M protein**, a streptococcal cell wall protein. These virulence factors help the bacteria to avoid  **phagocytosis** while provoking a substantial immune response that contributes to symptoms associated with streptococcal infections.

 *S. pyogenes* causes a wide variety of diseases not only in the skin, but in other organ systems as well. Examples of diseases elsewhere in the body include  **pharyngitis** and  **scarlet fever**, which will be covered in later chapters.

## Cellulitis, Erysipelas, and Erythema Nosodum

Common streptococcal conditions of the skin include cellulitis, erysipelas, and erythema nodosum. An infection that develops in the dermis or hypodermis can cause  **cellulitis**, which presents as a reddened area of the skin that is warm to the touch and painful. The causative agent is often  *S. pyogenes*, which may breach the epidermis through a cut or abrasion, although cellulitis may also be caused by staphylococci.  *S. pyogenes* can also cause  **erysipelas**, a condition that presents as a large, intensely inflamed patch of skin involving the dermis (often on the legs or face). These infections can be  **suppurative**, which results in a bullous form of erysipelas. Streptococcal and other pathogens may also cause a condition called  **erythema nodosum**, characterized by inflammation in the subcutaneous fat cells of the hypodermis. It sometimes results from a streptococcal infection, though other pathogens can also cause the condition. It is not suppurative, but leads to red nodules on the skin, most frequently on the shins ({'Figure_21_2_erysipelas Figure 21.2.erysipelas}).

In general, streptococcal infections are best treated through identification of the specific pathogen followed by treatment based upon that particular pathogen’s susceptibility to different antibiotics. Many immunological tests, including  **agglutination reactions** and  **ELISA**s, can be used to detect streptococci. Penicillin is commonly prescribed for treatment of cellulitis and erysipelas because resistance is not widespread in streptococci at this time. In most patients, erythema nodosum is self-limiting and is not treated with antimicrobial drugs. Recommended treatments may include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), cool wet compresses, elevation, and bed rest.


{image:'Figure_21_2_erysipelas}
        

## Necrotizing Fasciitis

Streptococcal infections that start in the skin can sometimes spread elsewhere, resulting in a rare but potentially life-threatening condition called  **necrotizing fasciitis**, sometimes referred to as  **flesh-eating bacterial syndrome**.  *S. pyogenes* is one of several species that can cause this rare but potentially-fatal condition; others include  **Klebsiella**,  **Clostridium**,  **Escherichia coli**,  *S.* *aureus*, and  **Aeromonas hydrophila**.

Necrotizing fasciitis occurs when the fascia, a thin layer of connective tissue between the skin and muscle, becomes infected. Severe invasive necrotizing fasciitis due to  **Streptococcus pyogenes** occurs when virulence factors that are responsible for adhesion and invasion overcome host defenses.  *S. pyogenes* invasins allow bacterial cells to adhere to tissues and establish infection. Bacterial proteases unique to  *S. pyogenes* aggressively infiltrate and destroy host tissues, inactivate complement, and prevent neutrophil migration to the site of infection. The infection and resulting tissue death can spread very rapidly, as large areas of skin become detached and die. <sup></sup>Treatment generally requires  **debridement** (surgical removal of dead or infected tissue) or amputation of infected limbs to stop the spread of the infection; surgical treatment is supplemented with intravenous antibiotics and other therapies ({'Figure_21_2_necrosis Figure 21.2.necrosis}).

Necrotizing fasciitis does not always originate from a skin infection; in some cases there is no known portal of entry. Some studies have suggested that experiencing a blunt force trauma can increase the risk of developing streptococcal necrotizing fasciitis.


{image:'Figure_21_2_necrosis}
        
