index: hide
name: Staphylococcal Infections of the Skin

 *Staphylococcus* species are commonly found on the skin, with  *S. epidermidis* and  *S. hominis* being prevalent in the normal microbiota.  *S. aureus* is also commonly found in the nasal passages and on healthy skin, but pathogenic strains are often the cause of a broad range of infections of the skin and other body systems.

 *S. aureus* is quite contagious. It is spread easily through skin-to-skin contact, and because many people are chronic nasal carriers (asymptomatic individuals who carry  *S. aureus* in their nares), the bacteria can easily be transferred from the nose to the hands and then to fomites or other individuals. Because it is so contagious,  *S. aureus* is prevalent in most community settings. This prevalence is particularly problematic in hospitals, where antibiotic-resistant strains of the bacteria may be present, and where immunocompromised patients may be more susceptible to infection. Resistant strains include methicillin-resistant  *S. aureus* (MRSA), which can be acquired through health-care settings ( **hospital-acquired MRSA**, or  **HA-MRSA**) or in the community ( **community-acquired MRSA**, or  **CA-MRSA**). Hospital patients often arrive at health-care facilities already colonized with antibiotic-resistant strains of  *S. aureus* that can be transferred to health-care providers and other patients. Some hospitals have attempted to detect these individuals in order to institute prophylactic measures, but they have had mixed success (see ).

When a staphylococcal infection develops, choice of medication is important. As discussed above, many staphylococci (such as MRSA) are resistant to some or many antibiotics. Thus, antibiotic sensitivity is measured to identify the most suitable antibiotic. However, even before receiving the results of sensitivity analysis, suspected  *S. aureus* infections are often initially treated with drugs known to be effective against MRSA, such as  **trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole** ( **TMP/SMZ**),  **clindamycin**, a  **tetracycline** ( **doxycycline** or  **minocycline**), or  **linezolid**.

The pathogenicity of staphylococcal infections is often enhanced by characteristic chemicals secreted by some strains. Staphylococcal virulence factors include  **hemolysins** called  **staphylolysins**, which are cytotoxic for many types of cells, including skin cells and white blood cells. Virulent strains of  *S. aureus* are also coagulase-positive, meaning they produce  **coagulase**, a plasma-clotting protein that is involved in abscess formation. They may also produce  **leukocidins**, which kill white blood cells and can contribute to the production of pus and Protein A, which inhibits phagocytosis by binding to the constant region of antibodies. Some virulent strains of  *S. aureus* also produce other toxins, such as  **toxic shock syndrome toxin-1** (see <link:>).

To confirm the causative agent of a suspected staphylococcal skin infection, samples from the wound are cultured. Under the microscope, gram-positive  *Staphylococcus* species have cellular arrangements that form grapelike clusters; when grown on blood agar, colonies have a unique pigmentation ranging from opaque white to cream. A  **catalase test** is used to distinguish  *Staphylococcus* from  **Streptococcus**, which is also a genus of gram-positive cocci and a common cause of skin infections.  **Staphylococcus** species are catalase-positive while  *Streptococcus* species are catalase-negative.

Other tests are performed on samples from the wound in order to distinguish coagulase-positive species of  *Staphylococcus* (CoPS) such as  *S. aureus* from common coagulase-negative species (CoNS) such as  *S. epidermidis*. Although CoNS are less likely than CoPS to cause human disease, they can cause infections when they enter the body, as can sometimes occur via catheters, indwelling medical devices, and wounds. Passive agglutination testing can be used to distinguish CoPS from CoNS. If the sample is coagulase-positive, the sample is generally presumed to contain  *S. aureus*. Additional genetic testing would be necessary to identify the particular strain of  *S. aureus.*

Another way to distinguish CoPS from CoNS is by culturing the sample on  **mannitol salt agar (MSA)**.  *Staphylococcus* species readily grow on this medium because they are tolerant of the high concentration of sodium chloride (7.5% NaCl). However, CoPS such as  *S. aureus* ferment mannitol (which will be evident on a MSA plate), whereas CoNS such as  *S. epidermidis* do not ferment mannitol but can be distinguished by the fermentation of other sugars such as lactose, malonate, and raffinose ({'Figure_21_2_mannitol Figure 21.2.mannitol}).


{image:'Figure_21_2_mannitol}
        

## Superficial Staphylococcal Infections

 *S. aureus* is often associated with  **pyoderma**, skin infections that are  **purulent**. Pus formation occurs because many strains of  *S. aureus* produce  **leukocidins**, which kill white blood cells. These purulent skin infections may initially manifest as  **folliculitis**, but can lead to  **furuncle** **s** or deeper abscesses called  **carbuncle** **s**.

Folliculitis generally presents as bumps and  **pimples** that may be itchy, red, and/or pus-filled. In some cases, folliculitis is self-limiting, but if it continues for more than a few days, worsens, or returns repeatedly, it may require medical treatment. Sweat, skin injuries, ingrown hairs, tight clothing, irritation from shaving, and skin conditions can all contribute to folliculitis. Avoidance of tight clothing and skin irritation can help to prevent infection, but topical antibiotics (and sometimes other treatments) may also help. Folliculitis can be identified by skin inspection; treatment is generally started without first culturing and identifying the causative agent.

In contrast,  **furuncles** (boils) are deeper infections ({'Figure_21_2_boil Figure 21.2.boil}). They are most common in those individuals (especially young adults and teenagers) who play contact sports, share athletic equipment, have poor nutrition, live in close quarters, or have weakened immune systems. Good hygiene and skin care can often help to prevent furuncles from becoming more infective, and they generally resolve on their own. However, if furuncles spread, increase in number or size, or lead to systemic symptoms such as fever and chills, then medical care is needed. They may sometimes need to be drained (at which time the pathogens can be cultured) and treated with antibiotics.

When multiple boils develop into a deeper lesion, it is called a carbuncle ({'Figure_21_2_boil Figure 21.2.boil}). Because  **carbuncles** are deeper, they are more commonly associated with systemic symptoms and a general feeling of illness. Larger, recurrent, or worsening carbuncles require medical treatment, as do those associated with signs of illness such as fever. Carbuncles generally need to be drained and treated with antibiotics. While carbuncles are relatively easy to identify visually, culturing and laboratory analysis of the wound may be recommended for some infections because antibiotic resistance is relatively common.

Proper hygiene is important to prevent these types of skin infections or to prevent the progression of existing infections.


{image:'Figure_21_2_boil}
        

 **Staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome (SSSS)** is another superficial infection caused by  *S. aureus* that is most commonly seen in young children, especially infants. Bacterial exotoxins first produce  **erythema** (redness of the skin) and then severe peeling of the skin, as might occur after scalding ({'Figure_21_2_SSSS Figure 21.2.SSSS}). SSSS is diagnosed by examining characteristics of the skin (which may rub off easily), using blood tests to check for elevated white blood cell counts, culturing, and other methods. Intravenous antibiotics and fluid therapy are used as treatment.


{image:'Figure_21_2_SSSS}
        

## Impetigo

The skin infection  **impetigo** causes the formation of vesicles,  **pustules**, and possibly  **bullae**, often around the nose and mouth. Bullae are large, fluid-filled blisters that measure at least 5 mm in diameter. Impetigo can be diagnosed as either nonbullous or bullous. In nonbullous impetigo, vesicles and pustules rupture and become encrusted sores. Typically the crust is yellowish, often with exudate draining from the base of the lesion. In bullous impetigo, the bullae fill and rupture, resulting in larger, draining, encrusted lesions ({'Figure_21_2_impetigo Figure 21.2.impetigo}).

Especially common in children, impetigo is particularly concerning because it is highly contagious. Impetigo can be caused by  *S. aureus* alone, by  **Streptococcus** *pyogenes* alone, or by coinfection of  *S. aureus* and  *S. pyogenes*. Impetigo is often diagnosed through observation of its characteristic appearance, although culture and susceptibility testing may also be used.

Topical or oral antibiotic treatment is typically effective in treating most cases of impetigo. However, cases caused by  *S. pyogenes* can lead to serious sequelae (pathological conditions resulting from infection, disease, injury, therapy, or other trauma) such as  **acute glomerulonephritis** ( **AGN**), which is severe inflammation in the kidneys.


{image:'Figure_21_2_impetigo}
        

## Nosocomial  *S. epidermidis* Infections

Though not as virulent as  *S. aureus*, the staphylococcus  *S. epidermidis* can cause serious opportunistic infections. Such infections usually occur only in hospital settings.  *S. epidermidis* is usually a harmless resident of the normal skin microbiota. However, health-care workers can inadvertently transfer  *S. epidermidis* to medical devices that are inserted into the body, such as catheters, prostheses, and indwelling medical devices. Once it has bypassed the skin barrier,  *S. epidermidis* can cause infections inside the body that can be difficult to treat. Like  *S. aureus*,  *S. epidermidis* is resistant to many antibiotics, and localized infections can become systemic if not treated quickly. To reduce the risk of nosocomial (hospital-acquired)  *S. epidermidis*, health-care workers must follow strict procedures for handling and sterilizing medical devices before and during surgical procedures.
