index: hide
name: Acne

One of the most ubiquitous skin conditions is  **acne**. Acne afflicts nearly 80% of teenagers and young adults, but it can be found in individuals of all ages. Higher incidence among adolescents is due to hormonal changes that can result in overproduction of sebum.

Acne occurs when  **hair follicles** become clogged by shed skin cells and  **sebum**, causing non-inflammatory lesions called  **comedones**. Comedones (singular “comedo”) can take the form of whitehead and blackhead  **pimples**. Whiteheads are covered by skin, whereas blackhead pimples are not; the black color occurs when lipids in the clogged follicle become exposed to the air and oxidize ({'Figure_21_2_acne Figure 21.2.acne}).


{image:'Figure_21_2_acne}
        

Often comedones lead to infection by  **Propionibacterium acnes**, a gram-positive, non-spore-forming, aerotolerant anaerobic bacillus found on skin that consumes components of sebum.  *P. acnes* secretes enzymes that damage the hair follicle, causing inflammatory lesions that may include  **papules**,  **pustules**,  **nodules**, or pseudocysts, depending on their size and severity.

Treatment of acne depends on the severity of the case. There are multiple ways to grade acne severity, but three levels are usually considered based on the number of comedones, the number of inflammatory lesions, and the types of lesions. Mild acne is treated with topical agents that may include  **salicylic acid** (which helps to remove old skin cells) or  **retinoids** (which have multiple mechanisms, including the reduction of inflammation). Moderate acne may be treated with antibiotics ( **erythromycin**,  **clindamycin**), acne creams (e.g.,  **benzoyl peroxide**), and hormones. Severe acne may require treatment using strong medications such as  **isotretinoin** (a retinoid that reduces oil buildup, among other effects, but that also has serious side effects such as photosensitivity). Other treatments, such as phototherapy and laser therapy to kill bacteria and possibly reduce oil production, are also sometimes used.
