index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.4.4.1
title: 9.4.4.1 - Snow Cover and Near-Surface Permafrost

The modelling of snow and near-surface {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost} (NSP) processes has received increased attention since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, in part because of the recognition that these processes can provide significant feedbacks on climate change (e.g., {cite.9.'Koven_et_al_2011}; {cite.9.'Lawrence_et_al_2011}). The SnowMIP2 project compared results from 33 snowpack models of varying complexity, including some snow models that are used in {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs}, using driving data from five NH locations ({cite.9.'Rutter_et_al_2009}). Most snow models were found to be consistent with observations at open sites, but there was much greater discrepancy at forested sites due to the complex interactions between plant canopy and snow cover. Despite these difficulties, the CMIP5 multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} reproduces key features of the large-scale snow cover ({'Figure_9_25 Figure 9.25}). In the NH, models are able to simulate the seasonal cycle of snow cover over the northern parts of continents, with more disagreement in southerly regions where snow cover is sparse, particularly over China and Mongolia (Brutel-Vuilmet et al., 2013). The latter weaknesses are associated with incorrect timing of the snow onset and melt, and possibly with the choice of thresholds for diagnosing snow cover in the model output. In spite of the good performance of the multi-model mean, there is a significant inter-model scatter of spring {Glossary.*Snow_cover_extent snow cover extent} in some regions. There is a strong linear correlation between Northern-Hemisphere spring snow cover extent and annual mean surface air temperature in the models, consistent with available observations. The recent negative {Glossary.*Trend trend} in spring snow cover is underestimated by the CMIP5 (and CMIP3) models ({cite.9.'Derksen_and_Brown_2012}), which is associated with an underestimate of the boreal land surface warming (Brutel-Vuilmet et al., 2013).

{image:'Figure_9_25}

Some CMIP5 models now represent NSP and frozen soil processes ({cite.9.'Koven_et_al_2013}), but this is not generally the case. Therefore it is difficult to make a direct quantitative evaluation of most CMIP5 models against permafrost observations. A less direct but more inclusive approach is to diagnose NSP extent using snow depths and skin temperatures generated by {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} to drive a stand-alone multi-layer permafrost model ({cite.9.'Pavlova_et_al_2007}). {'Figure_9_25 Figure 9.25} shows the result of using this approach on the CMIP5 ensemble. The multi-model mean is able to simulate the approximate location of the NSP boundary (as indicated by the 0°C {Glossary.*Soil_temperature soil temperature} isotherm). However, the range of present-day (1986–2005) NSP area inferred from individual models spans a factor of more than six (~4 to 25 × 106 km2) due to differences in simulated surface climate and to varying abilities of the underlying land surface models. Even though many CMIP5 models include some representation of soil freezing in mineral soils, very few include key processes necessary to accurately model NSP changes, such as the distinct properties of organic soils, the existence of local water tables and the heat released by microbial {Glossary.*Respiration respiration} ({cite.9.'Nicolsky_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Wania_et_al_2009}; {cite.9.'Koven_et_al_2011}, 2013).

Despite large differences in the absolute NSP area, the relationship between the decrease in NSP area and the warming air temperature over the present-day NSP {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} is similar, and approximately linear, in many models ({cite.9.'Slater_and_Lawrence_2013}).
