index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.1.3.1
title: 6.1.3.1 - Global Nitrogen Cycle Including Nitrous Oxide

The biogeochemical cycles of nitrogen and carbon are tightly coupled with each other owing to the metabolic needs of organisms for these two elements. Changes in the availability of one element will influence not only biological productivity but also availability and requirements for the other element ({cite.6.'Gruber_and_Galloway_2008}) and in the longer term, the structure and functioning of ecosystems as well.

Before the Industrial Era, the creation of reactive nitrogen Nr (all nitrogen species other than N2) from non-reactive atmospheric N2 occurred primarily through two natural processes: lightning and biological nitrogen fixation (BNF). BNF is a set of reactions that convert N2 to ammonia in a microbially mediated process. This input of Nr to the land and ocean {Glossary.*Biosphere_terrestrial_and_marine biosphere} was in balance with the loss of Nr though denitrification, a process that returns N2 back to the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} ({cite.6.'Ayres_et_al_1994}). This equilibrium has been broken since the beginning of the Industrial Era. Nr is produced by {Topics.*Human_Influence human activities} and delivered to ecosystems. During the last decades, the production of Nr by humans has been much greater than the natural production ({'Figure_6_4 Figure 6.4}a; {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_4.6_3_4_3 Section 6.3.4.3}). There are three main anthropogenic sources of Nr: (1) the Haber-Bosch industrial process, used to make NH3 from N2, for nitrogen fertilisers and as a feedstock for some industries; (2) the cultivation of legumes and other crops, which increases BNF; and (3) the combustion of fossil fuels, which converts atmospheric N2 and fossil fuel nitrogen into nitrogen oxides (NOx) emitted to the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} and re-deposited at the surface ({'Figure_6_4 Figure 6.4}a). In addition, there is a small flux from the mobilization of sequestered Nr from nitrogen-rich sedimentary rocks ({cite.6.'Morford_et_al_2011}) (not shown in {'Figure_6_4 Figure 6.4}a).

{image:'Figure_6_4}

The amount of anthropogenic Nr converted back to non-reactive N2 by denitrification is much smaller than the amount of Nr produced each year, that is, about 30 to 60% of the total Nr production, with a large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} ({cite.6.'Galloway_et_al_2004}; {cite.6.'Canfield_et_al_2010}; {cite.6.'Bouwman_et_al_2013}). What is more certain is the amount of {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O} emitted to the atmosphere. {Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} sources of N2O are about the same size as natural terrestrial sources (see {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_4 Section 6.3.4} and {'Table_6_9 Table 6.9} for the global N2O budget). In addition, {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of Nr to the atmosphere, as NH3 and NOx, are caused by agriculture and fossil fuel combustion. A portion of the emitted NH3 and NOx is deposited over the continents, while the rest gets transported by winds and deposited over the oceans. This atmospheric deposition flux of Nr over the oceans is comparable to the flux going from soils to rivers and delivered to the coastal ocean ({cite.6.'Galloway_et_al_2004}; {cite.6.'Suntharalingam_et_al_2012}). The increase of Nr creation during the Industrial Era, the connections among its impacts, including on climate and the connections with the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} are presented in {Box_6_2 Box 6.2}.

{table:'Table_6_9}

For the global ocean, the best BNF estimate is 160 TgN yr–1, which is roughly the midpoint of the minimum estimate of 140 TgN yr–1 of {cite.6.'Deutsch_et_al_2007 Deutsch et al. (2007)} and the maximum estimate of 177 TgN yr–1 ({cite.6.'Groszkopf_et_al_2012}). The probability that this estimate will need an upward revision in the near future is high because several additional processes are not yet considered ({cite.6.'Voss_et_al_2013}).

A global denitrification rate is much more difficult to constrain than the BNF considering the changing paradigms of nitrogen cycling in the oxygen minimum zones or the unconstrained losses in permeable sediments on the continental shelves ({cite.6.'Gao_et_al_2012}). The coastal ocean may have losses in the range of 100 to 250 ({cite.6.'Voss_et_al_2011}). For the open and distal ocean {cite.6.'Codispoti_2007 Codispoti (2007)} estimated an upper limit of denitrification of 400 TgN yr–1. {cite.6.'Voss_et_al_2013 Voss et al. (2013)} used a conservative estimate of 100 TgN yr–1 for the coastal ocean, and 200 to 300 TgN yr–1 for the open ocean. Because the upper limit in the global ocean is 400 TgN yr–1, 300 ± 100 TgN yr–1 is the best estimate for global ocean losses of reactive nitrogen ({'Table_6_9 Table 6.9}).

This chapter does not describe the phosphorus and sulphur biogeochemical cycles, but phosphorus limitations on carbon sinks are briefly addressed in {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_8.6_4_8_2 Section 6.4.8.2} and future sulphur deposition in {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_6.6_4_6_2 Section 6.4.6.2}.
