index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 14.2.5
title: 14.2.5 - Assessment Summary

It is projected that global monsoon precipitation will likely strengthen in the 21st century with increase in its area and intensity while the monsoon circulation weakens. Precipitation extremes including precipitation intensity and consecutive dry days are likely to increase at higher rates than those of mean precipitation. Overall, CMIP5 models project that the monsoon onset will be earlier or not change much and the monsoon retreat dates will delay, resulting in a lengthening of the monsoon season. Such features are likely to occur in most of Asian-Australian {Glossary.*Monsoon Monsoon} regions.

There is medium confidence that overall precipitation associated with the Asian-Australian monsoon will increase but with a north-south asymmetry: Indian and East Asian monsoon precipitation is projected to increase, while projected changes in Australian summer monsoon precipitation are small. There is medium confidence that the Indian summer monsoon circulation will weaken, but this is compensated by increased atmospheric moisture content, leading to more precipitation. For the East Asian summer monsoon, both monsoon circulation and precipitation are projected to increase. There is low confidence that over the Maritime Continent boreal summer rainfall will decrease and boreal winter rainfall will increase. There is low confidence that changes in the tropical Australian monsoon rainfall are small. There is low confidence that Western North Pacific summer monsoon circulation changes are small, but with increased rainfall due to enhanced moisture. There is medium confidence in an increase of Indian summer monsoon rainfall and its extremes throughout the 21st century under all RCP {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}. Their percentage change ratios are the largest and model agreement is highest among all monsoon regions.

There is low confidence in {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of American monsoon precipitation changes but there is high confidence in increases of precipitation extremes, of wet days and consecutive dry days. There is medium confidence in precipitation associated with the NAMS will arrive later in the annual cycle, and persist longer. Projections of changes in the timing and duration of the SAMS remain uncertain. There is high confidence in the expansion of SAMS, resulting from increased temperature and humidity.

Based on how models represent known drivers of the West African monsoon, there is low confidence in projections of its future development based on CMIP5. Confidence is low in projections of a small delay in the onset of the West African rainy season with an intensification of late-season rains.
