index: hide
name: Dispersion Forces

One of the three van der Waals forces is present in all condensed phases, regardless of the nature of the atoms or molecules composing the substance. This attractive force is called the  **London dispersion force** in honor of German-born American physicist Fritz  **London** who, in 1928, first explained it. This force is often referred to as simply the  **dispersion force**. Because the electrons of an atom or molecule are in constant motion (or, alternatively, the electron’s location is subject to quantum-mechanical variability), at any moment in time, an atom or molecule can develop a temporary,  **instantaneous dipole** if its electrons are distributed asymmetrically. The presence of this dipole can, in turn, distort the electrons of a neighboring atom or molecule, producing an  **induced dipole**. These two rapidly fluctuating, temporary dipoles thus result in a relatively weak electrostatic attraction between the species—a so-called dispersion force like that illustrated in {'Figure_10_1_DispForces Figure 10.1.DispForces}.


{image:'Figure_10_1_DispForces}
        

Dispersion forces that develop between atoms in different molecules can attract the two molecules to each other. The forces are relatively weak, however, and become significant only when the molecules are very close. Larger and heavier atoms and molecules exhibit stronger dispersion forces than do smaller and lighter atoms and molecules. F<sub>2</sub> and Cl<sub>2</sub> are gases at room temperature (reflecting weaker attractive forces); Br<sub>2</sub> is a liquid, and I<sub>2</sub> is a solid (reflecting stronger attractive forces). Trends in observed melting and boiling points for the halogens clearly demonstrate this effect, as seen in .


****

| Halogen | Molar Mass | Atomic Radius | Melting Point | Boiling Point |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| fluorine, F<sub>2</sub> | 38 g/mol | 72 pm | 53 K | 85 K |
| chlorine, Cl<sub>2</sub> | 71 g/mol | 99 pm | 172 K | 238 K |
| bromine, Br<sub>2</sub> | 160 g/mol | 114 pm | 266 K | 332 K |
| iodine, I<sub>2</sub> | 254 g/mol | 133 pm | 387 K | 457 K |
| astatine, At<sub>2</sub> | 420 g/mol | 150 pm | 575 K | 610 K |
    

The increase in melting and boiling points with increasing atomic/molecular size may be rationalized by considering how the strength of dispersion forces is affected by the electronic structure of the atoms or molecules in the substance. In a larger atom, the valence electrons are, on average, farther from the nuclei than in a smaller atom. Thus, they are less tightly held and can more easily form the temporary dipoles that produce the attraction. The measure of how easy or difficult it is for another electrostatic charge (for example, a nearby ion or polar molecule) to distort a molecule’s charge distribution (its electron cloud) is known as  **polarizability**. A molecule that has a charge cloud that is easily distorted is said to be very polarizable and will have large dispersion forces; one with a charge cloud that is difficult to distort is not very polarizable and will have small dispersion forces.

The shapes of molecules also affect the magnitudes of the dispersion forces between them. For example, boiling points for the isomers  *n*-pentane, isopentane, and neopentane (shown in {'Figure_10_1_PentIso Figure 10.1.PentIso}) are 36 °C, 27 °C, and 9.5 °C, respectively. Even though these compounds are composed of molecules with the same chemical formula, C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>12</sub>, the difference in boiling points suggests that dispersion forces in the liquid phase are different, being greatest for  *n*-pentane and least for neopentane. The elongated shape of  *n*-pentane provides a greater surface area available for contact between molecules, resulting in correspondingly stronger dispersion forces. The more compact shape of isopentane offers a smaller surface area available for intermolecular contact and, therefore, weaker dispersion forces. Neopentane molecules are the most compact of the three, offering the least available surface area for intermolecular contact and, hence, the weakest dispersion forces. This behavior is analogous to the connections that may be formed between strips of VELCRO brand fasteners: the greater the area of the strip’s contact, the stronger the connection.


{image:'Figure_10_1_PentIso}
        
