index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.3.3.2
title: 7.3.3.2 - Size Distribution and Optical Properties

{Glossary.*Aerosol Aerosol} size distribution is a key parameter determining both the aerosol optical and {Glossary.*Cloud_condensation_nuclei CCN} properties. Since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, much effort has been put into measuring and simulating the aerosol number rather than volume size distribution. For instance, number size distributions in the submicron range (30 to 500 nm) were measured at 24 sites in Europe for two years ({cite.7.'Asmi_et_al_2011}), although systematic measurements are still limited in other regions. Although validation studies show agreement between column-averaged volume size distribution from sunphotometer measurements and direct in situ (surface as well as aircraft-based) measurements at some locations ({cite.7.'Gerasopoulos_et_al_2007}; {cite.7.'Radhi_et_al_2010}; {cite.7.'Haywood_et_al_2011}), these inversion products have not been systematically validated. Satellite measurements produce valuable but more limited information on aerosol size.

The aerosol scattering, absorption and extinction coefficients depend on the aerosol size distribution, aerosol refractive index and mixing state. The humidification of internally mixed aerosols further influences their light scattering and absorption properties, through changes in particle shape, size and refractive index ({cite.7.'Freney_et_al_2010}). Aerosol absorption is a key climate-relevant aerosol property and earlier in situ methods to measure it suffered from significant {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} (Moosmüller et al., 2009), partly due to the lack of proper reference material for instrument calibration and development ({cite.7.'Baumgardner_et_al_2012}). Recent measurements using photo-acoustic methods and laser-induced incandescence methods are more accurate but remain sparse. The mass absorption cross sections for freshly generated {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} were measured to be 7.5 ± 1.2 m2 g–1 at 550 nm ({cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013}). Laboratory measurements conducted under well controlled conditions show that thick coating of soluble material over BC cores enhance the mass absorption cross section by a factor of 1.8 to 2 ({cite.7.'Cross_et_al_2010}; {cite.7.'Shiraiwa_et_al_2010}). It is more difficult to measure the enhancement factor in mass absorption cross sections for ambient BC, partly owing to the necessity of removing coatings of BC. {cite.7.'Knox_et_al_2009 Knox et al. (2009)} observed enhancement by a factor 1.2 to 1.6 near {Glossary.*Source source} regions. A much lower enhancement factor was observed by {cite.7.'Cappa_et_al_2012 Cappa et al. (2012)} by a new measurement technique, in contradiction to the laboratory experiments and theoretical calculations. These results may not be representative and would require confirmation by independent measurement methods.

As discussed in {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_1.7_3_1_2 Section 7.3.1.2}, the global mean AOD is not well constrained from satellite-based measurements and remains a significant source of uncertainty when estimating aerosol–radiation interactions ({cite.7.'Su_et_al_2013}). This is also true of the {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} fraction of AOD which is more difficult to constrain from observations. AeroCom phase II models simulate an anthropogenic AOD at 550 nm of 0.03 ± 0.01 (with the range corresponding to one standard deviation) relative to 1850, which represents 24 ± 6% of the total AOD ({cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013}). This is less than suggested by some satellite-based studies, i.e., 0.03 over the ocean only in {cite.7.'Kaufman_et_al_2005 Kaufman et al. (2005)}, and about 0.06 as a global average in {cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010 Loeb and Su (2010)} and {cite.7.'Bellouin_et_al_2013 Bellouin et al. (2013)}, but more than in the CMIP5 models (see {'Figure_9_29 Figure 9.29}). Overall there is medium confidence that between 20 and 40% of the global mean AOD is of anthropogenic origin. There is agreement that the anthropogenic aerosol is smaller in size and more absorbing than the natural aerosol ({cite.7.'Myhre_2009}; {cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010}), but there is disagreement on the anthropogenic absorption AOD and its contribution to the total absorption AOD, that is, 0.0015 ± 0.0007 (one standard deviation) relative to 1850 in {cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013 Myhre et al. (2013)} but about 0.004 and half of the total absorption AOD in {cite.7.'Bellouin_et_al_2013 Bellouin et al. (2013)}.
