index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.4.3.3
title: 6.4.3.3 - Projections of Future Carbon Cycle Response by Earth System Models Under the Representative Concentration Pathway Scenarios

Simulated changes in land and ocean carbon {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} and storage under the four RCP scenarios are presented here using results from CMIP5 {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} concentration-driven simulations (see {Box_6_4 Box 6.4}). The implications of these changes on atmospheric {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} and climate as simulated by CMIP5 {Topics.*Emissions emissions}-driven simulations are presented in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12}.

The results of the concentration-driven CMIP5 ESMs simulations show medium agreement on the magnitude of cumulative ocean carbon uptake from 1850 to 2005 ({'Figure_6_24 Figure 6.24}a): average 127 ± 28 PgC (1 standard deviation). The models show low agreement on the sign and magnitude of changes in land carbon storage ({'Figure_6_24 Figure 6.24}a): average 2 ± 74 PgC (1 standard deviation). These central estimates are very close to observational estimates of 125 ± 25 PgC for the ocean and –5 ± 40 PgC for the net cumulative land–{Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} flux respectively (see {'Table_6_12 Table 6.12}), but show a large spread across models. With very high confidence, for all four RCP scenarios, all models project continued ocean uptake throughout the 21st century, with higher uptake corresponding to higher concentration pathways. For RCP4.5, all the models also project an increase in land carbon uptake, but for {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6}, RCP6.0 and {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} a minority of models (4 out of 11 for RCP2.6, 1 out of 8 for RCP6.0 and 4 out of 15 for RCP8.5; {cite.6.'Jones_et_al_2013}) project a decrease in land carbon storage at 2100 relative to 2005. {Glossary.*Model_spread Model spread} in land carbon {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} is much greater than model spread in ocean carbon projections, at least in part due to different treatment of {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change}. Decade mean land and ocean fluxes are documented in Annex II, Table AII.3.1a, b. Important processes missing from many or all CMIP5 land carbon cycles include the role of nutrient cycles, {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost}, fire and {Glossary.*Ecosystem ecosystem} acclimation to changing climate. For this reason we assign low confidence to quantitative projections of future land uptake.

{image:'Figure_6_24}

{table:'Table_6_12}

The concentration-driven ESM simulations can be used to quantify the compatible {Glossary.*Fossil_fuel_emissions fossil fuel emissions} required to follow the four RCP CO2 pathways ({cite.6.'Jones_et_al_2013}; see {Box_6_4 Box 6.4}, {'Figure_6_25 Figure 6.25}, {'Table_6_12 Table 6.12}, Annex II, Table AII.2.1a). There is significant spread between ESMs, but general consistency between ESMs and compatible emissions estimated by IAMs to define each RCP scenario. However, for RCP8.5 on average, the CMIP5 models project lower compatible emissions than the MESSAGE IAM. The IMAGE IAM predicts that global negative emissions are required to achieve the RCP2.6 decline in {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing} from 3 W m–2 to 2.6 W m–2 by 2100. All models agree that strong emissions reductions are required to achieve this after about 2020 ({cite.6.'Jones_et_al_2013}). An average emission reduction of 50% (range 14 to 96%) is required by 2050 relative to 1990 levels. There is disagreement between those ESMs that performed this simulation over the necessity for global emissions in the RCP2.6 to become negative by the end of the 21st century to achieve this, with six ESMs simulating negative compatible emissions and four ESM models simulating positive emissions from 2080 to 2100. The RCP2.6 scenario achieves this negative emission rate through use of large-scale bio-energy with carbon-capture and storage (BECCS). It is as likely as not that sustained globally negative emissions will be required to achieve the reductions in atmospheric CO2 in the RCP2.6 scenario. This would be classed as a carbon dioxide removal ({Glossary.*Carbon_Dioxide_Removal CDR}) form of {Glossary.*Geoengineering geoengineering} under the definition used in this IPCC report, and is discussed further in {Chapters.6.6_5.6_5_2 Section 6.5.2}. The ESMs themselves make no assumptions about how the compatible emissions could or would be achieved, but merely compute the global total emission that is required to follow the CO2 concentration pathway, accounting for the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} response to climate and CO2, and for land use change CO2 emissions.

{image:'Figure_6_25}

The dominant cause of future changes in the {Glossary.*Airborne_fraction airborne fraction} of fossil fuel emissions (see {Chapters.6.6_3.6_3_2.6_3_2_4 Section 6.3.2.4}) is the {Topics.*Scenarios emissions scenario} and not carbon cycle feedbacks ({cite.6.'Jones_et_al_2013}; {'Figure_6_26 Figure 6.26}). Models show high agreement that 21st century cumulative airborne fraction will increase under rapidly increasing CO2 in RCP8.5 and decreases under the peak-and-decline RCP2.6 scenarios. The airborne fraction declines slightly under RCP4.5 and remains of similar magnitude in the RCP6.0 scenario. Between-model spread in changes in the land-fraction is greater than between-scenario spread. Models show high agreement that the ocean fraction will increase under RCP2.6 and remain of similar magnitude in the other RCP scenarios.

Several studies ({cite.6.'Jones_et_al_2006}; {cite.6.'Matthews_2006}; {cite.6.'Plattner_et_al_2008}; {cite.6.'Miyama_and_Kawamiya_2009}) have shown that climate–carbon cycle feedbacks affect the compatible fossil fuel CO2 emissions that are consistent with a given CO2 concentration pathway. Using decoupled RCP4.5 simulations (see {Box_6_4 Box 6.4}) five CMIP5 ESMs agree that the climate impact on carbon uptake by both land and oceans will reduce the compatible fossil fuel CO2 emissions for that scenario by between 6% and 29% between 2006 and 2100 respectively ({'Figure_6_27 Figure 6.27}), equating to an average of 157 ± 76 PgC (1 standard deviation) less carbon that can be emitted from fossil fuel use if climate {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} (see Glossary) is included. {Glossary.*Compatible_emissions Compatible emissions} would be reduced by a greater degree under higher CO2 scenarios that exhibit a greater degree of climate change ({cite.6.'Jones_et_al_2006}).

{image:'Figure_6_27}
