index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.5.5
title: 12.4.5.5 - Extreme Events in the Water Cycle

In addition to the changes in the seasonal pattern of mean precipitation described above, the distribution of precipitation events is projected to undergo profound changes ({cite.12.'Gutowski_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Sun_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Boberg_et_al_2010}). At daily to weekly scales, a shift to more intense individual storms and fewer weak storms is projected ({cite.12.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}). At seasonal or longer time scales, increased {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration} over land can lead to more frequent and more intense periods of agricultural drought.

A general relationship between changes in total precipitation and extreme precipitation does not exist ({cite.12.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}). Two possible mechanisms controlling short-term extreme precipitation amounts are discussed at length in the literature and are similar to the thermodynamic and dynamical mechanisms detailed above for changes in average precipitation.

The first considers that extreme precipitation events occur when most of the available atmospheric water vapour rapidly precipitates out in a single storm. The maximum amount of water vapour in air (saturation) is determined by the {Glossary.*Clausius_Clapeyron_equation_relationship Clausius–Clapeyron} relationship. As air temperature increases, this saturated amount of water also increases ({cite.12.'Allen_and_Ingram_2002}; {cite.12.'Pall_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Allan_and_Soden_2008}; {cite.12.'Kendon_et_al_2010}). {cite.12.'Kunkel_et_al_2013 Kunkel et al. (2013)} examined the CMIP5 model RCP4.5 and 8.5 {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} for changes in maximum water vapour concentrations, a principal factor controlling the probable bound on maximum precipitation, concluding that maximum water vapour changes are comparable to mean water vapour changes but that the potential for changes in dynamical factors is less compelling. Such increases in atmospheric water vapour are expected to increase the intensity of individual precipitation events, but have less impact on their frequency. As a result projected increases in extreme precipitation may be more reliable than similar projections of changes in mean precipitation in some regions ({cite.12.'Kendon_et_al_2010}).

A second mechanism for extreme precipitation put forth by O’Gorman and Schneider (2009a, 2009b) is that such events are controlled by anomalous horizontal moisture flux convergence and associated convective updrafts which would change in a more complicated fashion in a warmer world ({cite.12.'Sugiyama_et_al_2010}). {cite.12.'Emori_and_Brown_2005 Emori and Brown (2005)} showed that the thermodynamic mechanism dominated over the dynamical mechanism nearly everywhere outside the tropical warm pool. However, {cite.12.'Utsumi_et_al_2011 Utsumi et al. (2011)} used gridded observed daily data to find that daily extreme precipitation monotonically increases with temperature only at high latitudes, with the opposite behaviour in the tropics and a mix in the mid-latitudes. {cite.12.'Li_et_al_2011a Li et al. (2011a)} found that both mechanisms contribute to extreme precipitation in a high-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} aquaplanet model with updrafts as the controlling element in the tropics and air temperature controlling the mid-latitudes consistent with the results by {cite.12.'Chou_et_al_2012 Chou et al. (2012)}. Using a high-resolution regional model, {cite.12.'Berg_et_al_2009 Berg et al. (2009)} found a seasonal dependence in Europe with the Clausius–Clapeyron relationship providing an upper limit to daily precipitation intensity in winter but water availability rather than storage capacity is the controlling factor in summer. Additionally, Lenderink and Van Meijgaard (2008) found that very short (sub-daily) extreme precipitation events increase at a rate twice the amount {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} by Clausius–Clapeyron scaling in a very high-resolution model over Europe suggesting that both mechanisms can interact jointly. {cite.12.'Gastineau_and_Soden_2009 Gastineau and Soden (2009)} found in the CMIP3 models that the updrafts associated with the most extreme tropical precipitation events actually weaken despite an increase in the frequency of the heaviest rain rates further complicating simple mechanistic explanations. See also Sections {Chapters.7.7_6.7_6_5 7.6.5} and {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_2.11_3_2_5.11_3_2_5_2 11.3.2.5.2}.

Projections of changes in future extreme precipitation may be larger at the regional scales than for future mean precipitation, but natural variability is also larger causing a tendency for signal-to-noise ratios to decrease when considering increasingly extreme metrics. However, mechanisms of natural variability still are a large factor in assessing the robustness of projections ({cite.12.'Kendon_et_al_2008}). In addition, largescale circulation changes, which are uncertain, could dominate over the above mechanisms depending on the rarity and type of events considered. However, analysis of CMIP3 models suggests circulation changes are potentially insufficient to offset the influence of increasing atmospheric water vapour on extreme precipitation change over Europe at least on large spatial scales ({cite.12.'Kendon_et_al_2010}). An additional shift of the storm track has been shown in models with a better representation of the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere}, and this is found to lead to an enhanced increase in extreme rainfall over Europe in winter ({cite.12.'Scaife_et_al_2012}).

Similar to temperature extremes ({Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_3.12_4_3_3 Section 12.4.3.3}), the definition of a precipitation extreme depends very much on context and is often used in discussion of particular climate-related impacts ({cite.12.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012 Seneviratne et al. (2012)}, {Box_3_1 Box 3.1}). Consistently, {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} project future episodes of more intense precipitation in the wet seasons for most of the land areas, especially in the NH and its higher latitudes, and the {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon} regions of the world, and at a global average scale. The actual magnitude of the projected change is dependent on the model used, but there is strong agreement across the models over the direction of change ({cite.12.'Tebaldi_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Goubanova_and_Li_2007}; {cite.12.'Chen_and_Knutson_2008}; {cite.12.'Haugen_and_Iversen_2008}; {cite.12.'May_2008b}; {cite.12.'Kysely_and_Beranova_2009}; {cite.12.'Min_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Sillmann_et_al_2013}). Regional details are less robust in terms of the relative magnitude of changes but remain in good accord across models in terms of the sign of the change and the large-scale geographical patterns ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2005a}; {cite.12.'CCSP_2008a}). In semi-arid regions of the midlatitudes and subtropics such as the Mediterranean, the southwest USA, southwestern Australia, southern Africa and a large portion of South America, the tendency manifested in the majority of model simulations is for longer dry periods and is consistent with the average decreases shown in {'Figure_12_22 Figure 12.22}. {'Figure_12_26 Figure 12.26} shows projected percent changes in RX5day, the annual maximum of consecutive 5-day precipitation over land regions obtained from the CMIP5 models ({Box_2_4 Box 2.4}, {'Box_2_4_Table_1 Table 1}). Globally averaged end of 21st century changes over land range from 5% ({Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6}) to 20% ({Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}) more precipitation during very wet 5-day periods. Results from the CMIP3 models are shown for comparison (see {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_9 Section 12.4.9}). Locally, the few regions where this index of extreme precipitation decreases in the late 21st century RCP8.5 {Glossary.*Projection projection} coincide with areas of robust decreases in the mean precipitation of {'Figure_12_22 Figure 12.22}.

{image:'Figure_12_26}

{Glossary.*Drought Drought} is discussed extensively in the SREX report ({cite.12.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}) and the conclusions about future drought risk described there based on CMIP3 models are reinforced by the CMIP5 models. As noted in the SREX reports, assessments of changes in drought characteristics with climate change should be made in the context of specific impacts questions. The risk of future agricultural drought episodes is increased in the regions of robust {Glossary.*Soil_moisture soil moisture} decrease described in {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_5.12_4_5_3 Section 12.4.5.3} and shown in {'Figure_12_23 Figure 12.23}. Other measures in the literature of future agricultural drought are largely focussed on the Palmer Drought Severity Index ({cite.12.'Wehner_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Schwalm_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Dai_2013}) and project ‘extreme’ drought as the normal climatological state by the end of the 21st century under the high {Topics.*Emissions emission} {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} in many mid-latitude locations. However, this measure of agricultural drought has been criticized as overly sensitive to increased temperatures due to a simplified soil moisture model ({cite.12.'Hoerling_et_al_2012}). The consecutive dry-day index (CDD) is the length of the longest period of consecutive days with precipitation less than 1 mm ({Box_2_4 Box 2.4}, {'Box_2_4_Table_1 Table 1}). CMIP5 projected changes in CDD over the 2081–2100 period under the RCP8.5 scenario (relative to the 1981–2000 reference period in common with CMIP3) from the CMIP5 models are shown in {'Figure_12_26 Figure 12.26}c and exhibit patterns similar to projected changes in both precipitation and soil moisture ({cite.12.'Sillmann_et_al_2013}). Substantial increases in this measure of meteorological drought are projected in the Mediterranean, Central America, Brazil, South Africa and Australia while decreases are projected in high northern latitudes.

Truly rare precipitation events can cause very significant impacts. The statistics of these events at the tails of the precipitation distribution are well described by Extreme Value (EV) Theory although there are significant biases in the direct comparison of gridded model output and actual station data ({cite.12.'Smith_et_al_2009}). There is also strong evidence that model resolution plays a key role in replicating EV quantities estimated from gridded observational data, suggesting that high-resolution models may provide somewhat more confidence in projection of changes in rare precipitation events ({cite.12.'Fowler_et_al_2007a}; {cite.12.'Wehner_et_al_2011}). {'Figure_12_27 Figure 12.27} shows the late 21st century changes per degree Celsius in local warming in 20-year return values of annual maximum daily precipitation relative to the late 20th century (left) and the associated return periods of late 20th century 20-year return values at the end of the 21st century from the CMIP5 models. Across future emission scenarios, the global average of the CMIP5 multi-model median {Glossary.*Return_value return value} sensitivity is an increase of 5.3% °C–1 ({cite.12.'Kharin_et_al_2013}). The CMIP5 land average is close to the CMIP3 value of 4% °C–1 reported by {cite.12.'Min_et_al_2011 Min et al. (2011)} for a subset of CMIP3 models. Corresponding with this change, the global average of return periods of late 20th century 20-year return values is reduced from 20 years to 14 years for a 1°C local warming. Return periods are projected to be reduced by about 10 to 20% °C–1 over the most of the mid-latitude land masses with larger reductions over wet tropical regions ({cite.12.'Kharin_et_al_2013}). Hence, extreme precipitation events will very likely be more intense and more frequent in these regions in a warmer climate. Reductions in return values (or equivalently, increases in {Glossary.*Return_period return period}) are confined to convergent oceanic regions where circulation changes have reduced the available water vapour.

{image:'Figure_12_27}

Severe thunderstorms, associated with large hail, high winds, and tornadoes, are another example of {Topics.*Extreme_Events extreme weather} associated with the {Glossary.*Water_cycle water cycle}. The large-scale environments in which they occur are characterized by large Convective Available Potential Energy (CAPE) and deep tropospheric wind shear ({cite.12.'Brooks_et_al_2003}; {cite.12.'Brooks_2009}). Del Genio et al. (2007), Trapp et al. (2007, 2009), and Van Klooster and Roebber (2009) found a general increase in the energy and decrease in the shear terms from the late 20th century to the late 21st century over the USA using a variety of regional model simulations embedded in global model SRES scenario simulations. The relative change between these two competing factors would tend to favour more environments that would support severe thunderstorms, providing storms are initiated. {cite.12.'Trapp_et_al_2009 Trapp et al. (2009)}, for example, found an increase in favourable thunderstorm conditions for all regions of the USA east of the Rocky Mountains. Large variability in both the energy and shear terms means that statistical significance is not reached until late in the 21st century under high {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} scenarios. One way of assessing the possibility of a change in the frequency of future thunderstorms is to look at historical records of observed tornado, hail and wind occurrence with respect to the environmental conditions ({cite.12.'Brooks_2013}). This indicates that an increase in the fraction of severe thunderstorms containing non-tornadic winds would be consistent with the model projections of increased energy and decreased shear, but there has not been enough research to make a firm conclusion regarding future changes in frequency or magnitude.

Less work has been done on projected changes outside of the USA. {cite.12.'Marsh_et_al_2009 Marsh et al. (2009)} found that mean energy decreased in the warm season in Europe while it increased in the cool season. Even though the energy decreases in the warm season, the number of days with favourable environments for severe thunderstorms increases because of an increasing number of days with relatively large values of available energy. For Europe, with the Mediterranean Sea and Sahara Desert to the south, questions remain about changes in boundary layer moisture, a main driver of the energy term. {cite.12.'Niall_and_Walsh_2005 Niall and Walsh (2005)} examined changes in CAPE, which may be associated with hailstorm occurrence in southeastern Australia using a global model, and found little change under warmer conditions. {cite.12.'Leslie_et_al_2008 Leslie et al. (2008)} reconsidered the southeastern Australia hail question by nesting models with 1 km horizontal grid spacing and using sophisticated microphysical parameterizations and found an increase in the frequency of large hail by 2050 under the SRES A1B scenario, but with extremely large {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} in the environments and hail size.

Overall, for all parts of the world studied, the results are suggestive of a {Glossary.*Trend trend} toward environments favouring more severe thunderstorms, but the small number of analyses precludes any {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} estimate of this change.
