index: hide
name: Ray Tracing and Thin Lenses

 **Ray tracing** is the technique of determining or following (tracing) the paths that light rays take. For rays passing through matter, the law of refraction is used to trace the paths. Here we use ray tracing to help us understand the action of lenses in situations ranging from forming images on film to magnifying small print to correcting nearsightedness. While ray tracing for complicated lenses, such as those found in sophisticated cameras, may require computer techniques, there is a set of simple rules for tracing rays through thin lenses. A  **thin lens** is defined to be one whose thickness allows rays to refract, as illustrated in {'Figure26_6_1 Figure26.6.1}, but does not allow properties such as dispersion and aberrations. An ideal thin lens has two refracting surfaces but the lens is thin enough to assume that light rays bend only once. A thin symmetrical lens has two focal points, one on either side and both at the same distance from the lens. (See {'Figure26_6_5 Figure26.6.5}.) Another important characteristic of a thin lens is that light rays through its center are deflected by a negligible amount, as seen in {'Figure26_6_6 Figure26.6.6}.


{image:'Figure26_6_5}
        


{image:'Figure26_6_6}
        

Using paper, pencil, and a straight edge, ray tracing can accurately describe the operation of a lens. The rules for ray tracing for thin lenses are based on the illustrations already discussed:

  1. A ray entering a converging lens parallel to its axis passes through the focal point F of the lens on the other side. (See rays 1 and 3 in {'Figure26_6_1 Figure26.6.1}.)
  2. A ray entering a diverging lens parallel to its axis seems to come from the focal point F. (See rays 1 and 3 in {'Figure26_6_3 Figure26.6.3}.)
  3. A ray passing through the center of either a converging or a diverging lens does not change direction. (See {'Figure26_6_6 Figure26.6.6}, and see ray 2 in {'Figure26_6_1 Figure26.6.1} and {'Figure26_6_3 Figure26.6.3}.)
  4. A ray entering a converging lens through its focal point exits parallel to its axis. (The reverse of rays 1 and 3 in {'Figure26_6_1 Figure26.6.1}.)
  5. A ray that enters a diverging lens by heading toward the focal point on the opposite side exits parallel to the axis. (The reverse of rays 1 and 3 in {'Figure26_6_3 Figure26.6.3}.)
