index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.4.3.2
title: 13.4.3.2 - Dynamical Change

Observations suggest three main mechanisms by which climate change can affect the dynamics of ice flow in Greenland (Sections {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_3 4.4.3} and {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_4 4.4.4}): by directly affecting ice loss (outflow) through the {Glossary.*Calving calving} of icebergs and marine melt from marine-terminating outlet glaciers; by altering basal sliding through the interaction of surface melt water with the glacier bed; and indirectly through the interaction between SMB and ice flow. We assess the consequences of each of these processes.

Section 4.4.3.2 presents the observational basis on which concerns about increased ice loss by calving and marine melt are based. In particular, recent increases in loss are thought to be linked to the migration of subtropical water masses around the coast of Greenland ({cite.13.'Holland_et_al_2008}) and its occupation of coastal fjords ({cite.13.'Straneo_et_al_2010}; {cite.13.'Christoffersen_et_al_2011}). Output from 19 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} under scenario A1B showed warming of 1.7°C to 2.0°C around Greenland over the course of the 21st century ({cite.13.'Yin_et_al_2011}), suggesting that the {Glossary.*Trend trend} towards increased outflow triggered by warming coastal waters will continue.

Although {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of outflow are at a fairly early stage, literature now exists to make an assessment. Flowline modelling has successfully simulated the observed retreat and associated acceleration of the main outlet glaciers of the Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} (Helheim and Petermann Glaciers ({cite.13.'Nick_et_al_2009}, 2012); Jakobshavn Isbræ ({cite.13.'Vieli_and_Nick_2011})). The same model has been used to project mass loss from these glaciers ({cite.13.'Nick_et_al_2013}), as well as Kangerdlugssuaq {Glossary.*Glacier Glacier}, using ocean and {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} based on {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} A1B and {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}. At 2100, total projected SLR spans 8 to 13 mm for A1B and 11 to 17 mm for RCP8.5. These figures generalize to 40 to 63 mm and 57 to 85 mm, respectively, for the whole ice sheet based on a simple scaling between modelled and total ice-sheet area (a factor of ~5). {cite.13.'Price_et_al_2011 Price et al. (2011)} modelled the century-scale response of the ice sheet to the observed recent retreat of three outlet glaciers (Jakobshavn Isbræ, and Helheim and Kangerdlugssuaq Glaciers). At 2100, the projected SLR associated with the three modelled outlet glaciers is 0.6 to 1.4 mm, which equates to SLR of 4 to 8 mm after scaling (by a factor of ~6) to all outlet glaciers based on observed mass loss (van den Broeke et al., 2009). Total projected SLR then varies between 10 and 45 mm at 2100 if successive retreats are specified with a notional repeat interval between 50 and 10 years.

{cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} implemented the {cite.13.'Nick_et_al_2013 Nick et al. (2013)} retreat {Glossary.*Chronology chronology} within a 5-km {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} ice-sheet model along with their own generalization for including unsampled outlet glaciers. Associated SLR at 2100 is projected to vary between 8 and 18 mm. {cite.13.'Graversen_et_al_2011 Graversen et al. (2011)} attempted to capture the effect of increased outflow by enhancing basal sliding and generated SLR of 9 to 24 mm at 2100.

Two estimates of the effect of dynamical change on Greenland’s contribution to SLR by 2100 have been made on the basis of physical intuition. {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)} developed a low scenario by assuming a first-decade doubling of {Glossary.*Outlet_glacier outlet glacier} velocity throughout the ice sheet that equates to 93 mm SLR, while a high scenario that assumes an order of magnitude increase on the same time scale contributes 467 mm. {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011 Katsman et al. (2011)} used a similar methodology to obtain an estimate of 100 mm SLR.

Based primarily on {cite.13.'Nick_et_al_2013 Nick et al. (2013)}, we assess the upper limit of the likely range of this dynamical effect to be 85 mm for RCP8.5 and 63 mm for all other RCP scenarios for the year 2100. We have medium confidence in this as an upper limit because it is compatible with {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011 Katsman et al. (2011)}, the low scenario of {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)}, and {cite.13.'Price_et_al_2011 Price et al. (2011)} in the probable event of a sub-decadal recurrence interval. Although the likely upper limit is less than the high scenario of {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)}, process modelling gives no support to the order of magnitude increase in flow on which this scenario is based. It is higher than the contributions found by {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} and {cite.13.'Graversen_et_al_2011 Graversen et al. (2011)} for which there are two potential explanations. First, the generalization used to extrapolate from the modelled sample to all outlet glaciers differs. {cite.13.'Nick_et_al_2013 Nick et al. (2013)} used a scaling similar to the independently derived value of {cite.13.'Price_et_al_2011 Price et al. (2011)}, while the implied scaling used by {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} is substantially lower. Second, {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} suggested that surface ice melt and calving each remove marginal ice (see below), implying that by not including surface melt, overall mass loss by dynamics may be over {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} by the flowline model of {cite.13.'Nick_et_al_2013 Nick et al. (2013)}. At present, these studies cannot be reconciled and we therefore use the more inclusive range.

The lower limit of the likely range is assessed as 20 mm for RCP8.5 and 14 mm for all other RCP scenarios. This reflects the individual outlet glacier projections of {cite.13.'Nick_et_al_2013 Nick et al. (2013)} but uses a lower generalization more similar to that found by {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)}. This assessment of the lower limit is compatible with {cite.13.'Price_et_al_2011 Price et al. (2011)} and {cite.13.'Graversen_et_al_2011 Graversen et al. (2011)}.

Section 4.4.3.2 assesses understanding of the link between abundant summer meltwater, lubrication of the ice-sheet base, and enhanced ice flow. Although this mechanism appears important in modulating present-day ice flow, it is not supported as the cause of recent mass loss. {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} incorporated a {Glossary.*Parameterization parameterization} of this effect based on field observations, which results in less than a millimetre SLR by 2100 in their projections. {cite.13.'Bindschadler_et_al_2013 Bindschadler et al. (2013)} reported a suite of experiments assessing this effect in an eight-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}, but their parameterization appears overly simplistic and may well exaggerate the importance of the effect. These projections do not incorporate the effect on ice flow of the latent heat released by increased future quantities of melt water within the ice sheet ({cite.13.'Phillips_et_al_2010}; 2013), for which no projections are currently available. {Glossary.*Basal_lubrication Basal lubrication} is therefore assessed as making an insignificant contribution to the likely range of SLR over the next century and is omitted in the remainder of the assessment. We have medium confidence in projections of this effect primarily because recent improvements in process-based understanding show that it has little contribution to mass loss (Section 4.4.3.2); the potential of latent-heat effects in the future limits a higher level of confidence.

Finally, we assess the level of interaction between SMB change and ice flow. In {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, this effect is assessed as 0 ± 10% (likely range) of SMB, based on Huybrechts and de Wolde (1999) and {cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006 Gregory and Huybrechts (2006)}. This assessment included both the positive {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} between SMB and the height of the ice sheet, and a countering negative feedback involving ice flow and depletion effects. The latter effect is partly included in our assessment of the direct impacts of climate change on ice flow, and we therefore limit our assessment to the SMB-height feedback. Few studies explicitly determine this effect, but {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} reported that it amounts to 5 to 15% of SMB over the course of the 21st century, which we extend slightly (0 to 15%) to reflect possible interaction with mass loss by calving ({cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013}).

{cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2013 Goelzer et al. (2013)} and Gillet-Chaulet et al. (2012) suggested that SMB and ice dynamics cannot be assessed separately because of the strong interaction between ice loss and climate due to, for instance, calving and SMB. The current assessment has by necessity separated these effects because the type of coupled ice sheet-{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} needed to make a full assessment do not yet exist. These interactions may well combine to reduce SLR in comparison to the assessed range because of the mass-depletion effect of retreating outlet glaciers. Another {Glossary.*Source source} of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} is the bedrock topography of Greenland, although recent improvements in data coverage ({cite.13.'Bamber_et_al_2013}) suggest that the majority of the ice sheet rests on bedrock above {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} and the number of deep bedrock troughs penetrating into the interior of Greenland are limited, thus limiting the potential for marine ice-sheet instability (see {Box_13_2 Box 13.2}).

Although not strictly comparable because they contain a different balance of ice-dynamical effects, the assessment is consistent with {cite.13.'Bindschadler_et_al_2013 Bindschadler et al. (2013)}, who reported an extensive model inter-comparison exercise in which standardized experiments are combined to represent the impact of climate change under RCP8.5 on the Greenland ice sheet. The resultant {Glossary.*Projection projection} included contributions from lubrication, marine melt and SMB-coupling and generated a mean SLR at 2100 of 162 mm over five models, or 53 mm if an outlier with anomalously high response is removed (including SMB results in SLR at 2100 of 223 and 114 mm for fiveand four-model means, respectively). This comparison provides further weight to our confidence.

In summary, dynamical change within the Greenland ice sheet is likely (medium confidence) to lead to SLR during the next century with a range of 20 to 85 mm for RCP8.5, and 14 to 63 mm for all other scenarios by year 2100. The latter are assumed to have uniform SLR in the absence of literature allowing these scenarios to be assessed individually, although dependency on scenario is expected to exist. In addition, mass loss associated with SMB-height feedback is likely to contribute a further 0 to 15% of SMB (in itself scenario dependent). This equates to, for example, 0 to 14 mm by 2100 based on the central estimate of RCP8.5. The peripheral glaciers of Greenland are not included here but are in the assessment of global glaciers’ contribution to SLR ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_2 Section 13.4.2}). All the available literature suggests that this dynamical contribution to sea level rise will continue well beyond 2100.
