index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.1
title: 10.1 - Introduction

This chapter assesses the causes of observed changes assessed in {Chapters.2 Chapter 2} to 5 and uses understanding of physical processes, {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} and statistical approaches. The chapter adopts the terminology for detection and attribution proposed by the IPCC good practice guidance paper on detection and attribution ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2010}) and for uncertainty {cite.10.'Mastrandrea_et_al_2011 Mastrandrea et al. (2011)}. {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution Detection} and attribution of impacts of climate changes are assessed by Working Group II, where Chapter 18 assesses the extent to which atmospheric and oceanic changes influence ecosystems, infrastructure, human health and activities in economic sectors.

Evidence of a {Topics.*Human_Influence human influence} on climate has grown stronger over the period of the four previous assessment reports of the IPCC. There was little observational evidence for a detectable human influence on climate at the time of the First IPCC Assessment Report. By the time of the second report there was sufficient additional evidence for it to conclude that ‘the balance of evidence suggests a discernible human influence on global climate’. The {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 Third Assessment Report} found that a distinct greenhouse gas (GHG) signal was robustly detected in the observed temperature record and that ‘most of the observed warming over the last fifty years is likely to have been due to the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations.’

With the additional evidence available by the time of the Fourth Assessment Report, the conclusions were further strengthened. This evidence included a wider range of observational data, a greater variety of more sophisticated climate models including improved representations of forcings and processes and a wider variety of analysis techniques. This enabled the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} report to conclude that ‘most of the observed increase in global average temperatures since the mid-20th century is very likely due to the observed increase in {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} greenhouse gas concentrations’. The AR4 also concluded that ‘discernible human influences now extend to other aspects of climate, including ocean warming, continental-average temperatures, {Topics.*Extreme_Events temperature extremes} and wind patterns.’

A number of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} remained at the time of AR4. For example, the observed variability of ocean temperatures appeared inconsistent with climate models, thereby reducing the confidence with which observed ocean warming could be {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to human influence. Also, although observed changes in global rainfall patterns and increases in heavy precipitation were assessed to be qualitatively consistent with expectations of the response to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings}, detection and attribution studies had not been carried out. Since the AR4, improvements have been made to observational data sets, taking more complete account of systematic biases and inhomogeneities in observational systems, further developing uncertainty estimates, and correcting detected data problems (Chapters {Chapters.2} and {Chapters.3}). A new set of simulations from a greater number of {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} have been performed as part of the Coupled {Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project Phase 5 (CMIP5). These new simulations have several advantages over the CMIP3 simulations assessed in the AR4 ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b}). They incorporate some moderate increases in {Glossary.*Resolution resolution}, improved parameterizations, and better representation of aerosols ({Chapters.9 Chapter 9}). Importantly for attribution, in which it is necessary to partition the response of the climate system to different forcings, most CMIP5 models include simulations of the response to natural forcings only, and the response to increases in well mixed {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} only ({cite.10.'Taylor_et_al_2012}).

The advances enabled by this greater wealth of observational and model data are assessed in this chapter. In this assessment, there is increased focus on the extent to which the climate system as a whole is responding in a coherent way across a suite of climate variables such as surface mean temperature, temperature extremes, ocean heat content, ocean salinity and precipitation change. There is also a global to regional perspective, assessing the extent to which not just global mean changes but also spatial patterns of change across the globe can be attributed to anthropogenic and natural forcings.
