index: hide
name: 

 *Use the following information to answer the next 15 exercises:* Indicate if the hypothesis test is for

  1. independent group means, population standard deviations, and/or variances known
  2. independent group means, population standard deviations, and/or variances unknown
  3. matched or paired samples
  4. single mean
  5. two proportions
  6. single proportion

 *Use the following information to answer the next three exercises:* A study is done to determine which of two soft drinks has more sugar. There are 13 cans of Beverage A in a sample and six cans of Beverage B. The mean amount of sugar in Beverage A is 36 grams with a standard deviation of 0.6 grams. The mean amount of sugar in Beverage B is 38 grams with a standard deviation of 0.8 grams. The researchers believe that Beverage B has more sugar than Beverage A, on average. Both populations have normal distributions.

 *Use the following information to answer the next 12 exercises:* The U.S. Center for Disease Control reports that the mean life expectancy was 47.6 years for whites born in 1900 and 33.0 years for nonwhites. Suppose that you randomly survey death records for people born in 1900 in a certain county. Of the 124 whites, the mean life span was 45.3 years with a standard deviation of 12.7 years. Of the 82 nonwhites, the mean life span was 34.1 years with a standard deviation of 15.6 years. Conduct a hypothesis test to see if the mean life spans in the county were the same for whites and nonwhites.
