index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.1.1.3
title: 8.1.1.3 - Limitations of Radiative Forcing

Both the RF and {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} concepts have strengths and weaknesses in addition to those discussed previously. Dedicated climate model simulations that are required to diagnose the ERF can be more computationally demanding than those for instantaneous RF or RF because many years are required to reduce the influence of {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability}. The presence of meteorological variability can also make it difficult to isolate the ERF of small {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} that are easily isolated in the pair of radiative transfer calculations performed for RF ({'Figure_8_1 Figure 8.1}). For RF, on the other hand, a definition of the {Glossary.*Tropopause tropopause} is required, which can be ambiguous.

In many cases, however, ERF and RF are nearly equal. Analysis of 11 models from the current Coupled {Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) generation finds that the rapid adjustments to {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} cause fixed-{Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST}-based ERF to be 2% less than RF, with an intermodel standard deviation of 7% ({cite.8.'Vial_et_al_2013}). This is consistent with an earlier study of six {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} that found a substantial inter-model variation in the rapid tropospheric adjustment to CO2 using regression analysis in slab ocean models, though the {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} mean adjustment was less than 5% ({cite.8.'Andrews_and_Forster_2008}). Part of the large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} range arises from the greater noise inherent in regression analyses of single runs in comparison with fixed-SST experiments. Using fixed-SST simulations, {cite.8.'Hansen_et_al_2005 Hansen et al. (2005)} found that ERF is virtually identical to RF for increased CO2, tropospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} and solar irradiance, and within 6% for methane ({Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}), nitrous oxide ({Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O}), stratospheric aerosols and for the {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol}–radiation interaction of reflective aerosols. {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2013b Shindell et al. (2013b)} also found that RF and ERF are statistically equal for tropospheric ozone. {cite.8.'Lohmann_et_al_2010 Lohmann et al. (2010)} report a small increase in the forcing from CO2 using ERF instead of RF based on the fixed-SST technique, while finding no substantial difference for CH4, RF due to aerosol–radiation interactions or aerosol effects on cloud {Glossary.*Albedo albedo}. In the fixed-SST simulations of {cite.8.'Hansen_et_al_2005 Hansen et al. (2005)}, ERF was about 20% less than RF for the atmospheric effects of {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} aerosols (not including microphysical aerosol–cloud interactions), and nearly 300% greater for the forcing due to BC snow albedo forcing ({cite.8.'Hansen_et_al_2007}). ERF was slightly greater than RF for stratospheric ozone in {cite.8.'Hansen_et_al_2005 Hansen et al. (2005)}, but the opposite is true for more recent analyses ({cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2013b}), and hence it seems most appropriate at present to use RF for this small forcing. The various studies demonstrate that RF provides a good estimate of ERF in most cases, as the differences are very small, with the notable exceptions of BC-related forcings ({cite.8.'Bond_et_al_2013}). ERF provides better characterization of those effects, as well as allowing quantification of a broader range of effects including all aerosol–cloud interactions. Hence while RF and ERF are generally quite similar for {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs}, ERF typically provides a more useful indication of {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} for {Glossary.*Near_term_climate_forcers near-term climate forcers} (see {Box_8_2 Box 8.2}). As the rapid adjustments included in ERF differ in strength across {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}, the uncertainty range for ERF estimates tends to be larger than the range for RF estimates.

Whereas the global mean ERF provides a useful indication of the eventual change in global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}, it does not reflect {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} changes. This is true for all forcing agents, but is especially the case for the inhomogeneously distributed forcings because they activate climate feedbacks based on their regional distribution. For example, forcings over Northern Hemisphere (NH) middle and high latitudes induce snow and ice albedo feedbacks more than forcings at lower latitudes or in the Southern Hemisphere (SH) (e.g., {cite.8.'Shindell_and_Faluvegi_2009}).

In the case of agents that strongly absorb incoming {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation} (such as BC, and to a lesser extent organic carbon (OC) and ozone) the TOA forcing provides little indication of the change in solar radiation reaching the surface which can force local changes in evaporation and alter regional and {Glossary.*General_circulation general circulation} patterns (e.g., {cite.8.'Ramanathan_and_Carmichael_2008}; {cite.8.'Wang_et_al_2009}). Hence the forcing at the surface, or the atmospheric heating, defined as the difference between surface and tropopause/TOA forcing, might also be useful metrics. Global mean precipitation changes can be related separately to ERF within the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} and to a slower response to global mean temperature changes ({cite.8.'Andrews_et_al_2010}; {cite.8.'Ming_et_al_2010}; Ban-Weiss et al., 2012). Relationships between surface forcing and localized aspects of climate response have not yet been clearly quantified, however.

In general, most widely used definitions of forcing and most forcing-based metrics are intended to be proportional to the eventual temperature response, and most analyses to date have explored the global mean temperature response only. These metrics do not explicitly include impacts such as changes in precipitation, surface sunlight available for {Glossary.*Photosynthesis photosynthesis}, {Topics.*Extreme_Events extreme events}, and so forth, or regional temperatures, which can differ greatly from the global mean. Hence although they are quite useful for understanding the factors driving global mean temperature change, they provide only an imperfect and limited perspective on the factors driving broader climate change. In addition, a {Glossary.*Metric metric} based solely on radiative perturbations does not allow comparison of non-RFs, such as effects of land cover change on {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration} or physiological impacts of CO2 and O3 except where these cause further impacts on radiation such as through cloud cover changes (e.g., {cite.8.'Andrews_et_al_2012b}).
