index: hide
name: Amplification-Based DNA Analysis Methods

Various methods can be used for obtaining sequences of DNA, which are useful for studying disease-causing organisms. With the advent of rapid sequencing technology, our knowledge base of the entire genomes of pathogenic organisms has grown phenomenally. We start with a description of the polymerase chain reaction, which is not a sequencing method but has allowed researchers and clinicians to obtain the large quantities of DNA needed for sequencing and other studies. The polymerase chain reaction eliminates the dependence we once had on cells to make multiple copies of DNA, achieving the same result through relatively simple reactions outside the cell.

## Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)

Most methods of DNA analysis, such as restriction enzyme digestion and agarose gel electrophoresis, or DNA sequencing require large amounts of a specific DNA fragment. In the past, large amounts of DNA were produced by growing the host cells of a genomic library. However, libraries take time and effort to prepare and DNA samples of interest often come in minute quantities. The  **polymerase chain reaction (PCR)** permits rapid amplification in the number of copies of specific DNA sequences for further analysis ({'Figure_12_2_PCR Figure 12.2.PCR}). One of the most powerful techniques in molecular biology, PCR was developed in 1983 by Kary  **Mullis** while at Cetus Corporation. PCR has specific applications in research, forensic, and clinical laboratories, including:

  * determining the sequence of nucleotides in a specific region of DNA
  * amplifying a target region of DNA for cloning into a plasmid vector
  * identifying the source of a DNA sample left at a crime scene
  * analyzing samples to determine  **paternity**
  * comparing samples of ancient DNA with modern organisms
  * determining the presence of difficult to culture, or unculturable, microorganisms in humans or environmental samples

PCR is an  *in vitro* laboratory technique that takes advantage of the natural process of DNA replication. The heat-stable DNA polymerase enzymes used in PCR are derived from hyperthermophilic prokaryotes.  **Taq DNA polymerase**, commonly used in PCR, is derived from the  **Thermus aquaticus** bacterium isolated from a hot spring in Yellowstone National Park. DNA replication requires the use of primers for the initiation of replication to have free 3ʹ-hydroxyl groups available for the addition of nucleotides by DNA polymerase. However, while primers composed of RNA are normally used in cells, DNA primers are used for PCR.  **DNA primers** are preferable due to their stability, and DNA primers with known sequences targeting a specific DNA region can be chemically synthesized commercially. These DNA primers are functionally similar to the DNA probes used for the various hybridization techniques described earlier, binding to specific targets due to complementarity between the target DNA sequence and the primer.

PCR occurs over multiple cycles, each containing three steps:  **denaturation**,  **annealing**, and extension. Machines called  **thermal cycler**s are used for PCR; these machines can be programmed to automatically cycle through the temperatures required at each step ({'Figure_12_0_thermocycl Figure 12.0.thermocycl}). First, double-stranded template DNA containing the target sequence is denatured at approximately 95 °C. The high temperature required to physically (rather than enzymatically) separate the DNA strands is the reason the heat-stable DNA polymerase is required. Next, the temperature is lowered to approximately 50 °C. This allows the DNA primers complementary to the ends of the target sequence to anneal (stick) to the template strands, with one primer annealing to each strand. Finally, the temperature is raised to 72 °C, the optimal temperature for the activity of the heat-stable DNA polymerase, allowing for the addition of nucleotides to the primer using the single-stranded target as a template. Each cycle doubles the number of double-stranded target DNA copies. Typically, PCR protocols include 25–40 cycles, allowing for the amplification of a single target sequence by tens of millions to over a trillion.

Natural DNA replication is designed to copy the entire genome, and initiates at one or more origin sites. Primers are constructed during replication, not before, and do not consist of a few specific sequences. PCR targets specific regions of a DNA sample using sequence-specific primers. In recent years, a variety of  **isothermal PCR** amplification methods that circumvent the need for thermal cycling have been developed, taking advantage of accessory proteins that aid in the DNA replication process. As the development of these methods continues and their use becomes more widespread in research, forensic, and clinical labs, thermal cyclers may become obsolete.


{image:'Figure_12_2_PCR}
        

## PCR Variations

Several later modifications to PCR further increase the utility of this technique.  **Reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR)** is used for obtaining DNA copies of a specific mRNA molecule. RT-PCR begins with the use of the reverse transcriptase enzyme to convert mRNA molecules into  **cDNA**. That cDNA is then used as a template for traditional PCR amplification. RT-PCR can detect whether a specific gene has been expressed in a sample. Another recent application of PCR is  **real-time PCR**, also known as  **quantitative PCR (qPCR)**. Standard PCR and RT-PCR protocols are not quantitative because any one of the reagents may become limiting before all of the cycles within the protocol are complete, and samples are only analyzed at the end. Because it is not possible to determine when in the PCR or RT-PCR protocol a given reagent has become limiting, it is not possible to know how many cycles were completed prior to this point, and thus it is not possible to determine how many original template molecules were present in the sample at the start of PCR. In qPCR, however, the use of fluorescence allows one to monitor the increase in a double-stranded template during a PCR reaction as it occurs. These kinetics data can then be used to quantify the amount of the original target sequence. The use of qPCR in recent years has further expanded the capabilities of PCR, allowing researchers to determine the number of DNA copies, and sometimes organisms, present in a sample. In clinical settings, qRT-PCR is used to determine viral load in HIV-positive patients to evaluate the effectiveness of their therapy.

## DNA Sequencing

A basic sequencing technique is the  **chain termination method**, also known as the  **dideoxy method** or the  **Sanger DNA sequencing method**, developed by Frederick  **Sanger** in 1972. The chain termination method involves DNA replication of a single-stranded template with the use of a  **DNA primer** to initiate synthesis of a complementary strand, DNA polymerase, a mix of the four regular deoxynucleotide (dNTP) monomers, and a small proportion of  **dideoxynucleotides** (ddNTPs), each labeled with a  **molecular beacon**. The ddNTPs are monomers missing a hydroxyl group (–OH) at the site at which another nucleotide usually attaches to form a chain ({'Figure_12_2_ddNTP Figure 12.2.ddNTP}). Every time a ddNTP is randomly incorporated into the growing complementary strand, it terminates the process of DNA replication for that particular strand. This results in multiple short strands of replicated DNA that are each terminated at a different point during replication. When the reaction mixture is subjected to gel electrophoresis, the multiple newly replicated DNA strands form a ladder of differing sizes. Because the ddNTPs are labeled, each band on the gel reflects the size of the DNA strand when the ddNTP terminated the reaction.

In Sanger’s day, four reactions were set up for each DNA molecule being sequenced, each reaction containing only one of the four possible ddNTPs. Each ddNTP was labeled with a radioactive phosphorus molecule. The products of the four reactions were then run in separate lanes side by side on long, narrow PAGE gels, and the bands of varying lengths were detected by autoradiography. Today, this process has been simplified with the use of ddNTPs, each labeled with a different colored fluorescent dye or fluorochrome ({'Figure_12_2_fluoroddNTP Figure 12.2.fluoroddNTP}), in one sequencing reaction containing all four possible ddNTPs for each DNA molecule being sequenced ({'Figure_12_2_Sequencer Figure 12.2.Sequencer}). These fluorochromes are detected by fluorescence spectroscopy. Determining the fluorescence color of each band as it passes by the detector produces the nucleotide sequence of the template strand.


{image:'Figure_12_2_ddNTP}
        


{image:'Figure_12_2_fluoroddNTP}
        


{image:'Figure_12_2_Sequencer}
        

Since 2005, automated sequencing techniques used by laboratories fall under the umbrella of  **next generation sequencing**, which is a group of automated techniques used for rapid DNA sequencing. These methods have revolutionized the field of molecular genetics because the low-cost sequencers can generate sequences of hundreds of thousands or millions of short fragments (25 to 600 base pairs) just in one day. Although several variants of next generation sequencing technologies are made by different companies (for example, 454 Life Sciences’ pyrosequencing and Illumina’s Solexa technology), they all allow millions of bases to be sequenced quickly, making the sequencing of entire genomes relatively easy, inexpensive, and commonplace. In  **454 sequencing (pyrosequencing)**, for example, a DNA sample is fragmented into 400–600-bp single-strand fragments, modified with the addition of DNA adapters to both ends of each fragment. Each DNA fragment is then immobilized on a bead and amplified by PCR, using primers designed to anneal to the adapters, creating a bead containing many copies of that DNA fragment. Each bead is then put into a separate well containing sequencing enzymes. To the well, each of the four nucleotides is added one after the other; when each one is incorporated, pyrophosphate is released as a byproduct of polymerization, emitting a small flash of light that is recorded by a detector. This provides the order of nucleotides incorporated as a new strand of DNA is made and is an example of synthesis sequencing. Next generation sequencers use sophisticated software to get through the cumbersome process of putting all the fragments in order. Overall, these technologies continue to advance rapidly, decreasing the cost of sequencing and increasing the availability of sequence data from a wide variety of organisms quickly.

The National Center for Biotechnology Information houses a widely used genetic sequence database called  **GenBank** where researchers deposit genetic information for public use. Upon publication of sequence data, researchers upload it to GenBank, giving other researchers access to the information. The collaboration allows researchers to compare newly discovered or unknown sample sequence information with the vast array of sequence data that already exists.
