index: hide
name: Molecular Analysis of Proteins

In many cases it may not be desirable or possible to study DNA or RNA directly. Proteins can provide species-specific information for identification as well as important information about how and whether a cell or tissue is responding to the presence of a pathogenic microorganism. Various proteins require different methods for isolation and characterization.

## Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis

A variation of gel electrophoresis, called  **polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE)**, is commonly used for separating proteins. In  **PAGE**, the gel matrix is finer and composed of polyacrylamide instead of agarose. Additionally, PAGE is typically performed using a vertical gel apparatus ({'Figure_12_2_PAGE Figure 12.2.PAGE}). Because of the varying charges associated with amino acid side chains, PAGE can be used to separate intact proteins based on their net charges. Alternatively, proteins can be denatured and coated with a negatively charged detergent called  **sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)**, masking the native charges and allowing separation based on size only. PAGE can be further modified to separate proteins based on two characteristics, such as their charges at various pHs as well as their size, through the use of  **two-dimensional PAGE**. In any of these cases, following electrophoresis, proteins are visualized through staining, commonly with either Coomassie blue or a silver stain.


{image:'Figure_12_2_PAGE}
        
