index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.5.1
title: 13.5.1 - Process-Based Projections for the 21st Century

The process-based {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of GMSL rise for each RCP scenario are based on results from 21 CMIP5 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} from which projections of SAT change and {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion thermal expansion} are available (see {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_1 Section 13.4.1}). Where CMIP5 results were not available for a particular AOGCM and scenario, they were estimated ({cite.13.'Good_et_al_2011}; 2013) ({Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_1.12_4_1_2 Section 12.4.1.2}; Supplementary Material). The projections of thermal expansion do not include an adjustment for the omission of volcanic {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} in AOGCM spin-up (Section 13.3.4.2), as this is uncertain and relatively small (about 10 mm during the 21st century). Changes in {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} and ice-sheet SMB are calculated from the global mean SAT projections using parameterizations derived from the results of process-based models of these components (note that glaciers on Antarctica are covered by the Antarctic ice-sheet SMB {Glossary.*Projection projection}, and are therefore not included in the glacier projections) (Sections {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_2 13.4.2} {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_1 13.4.3.1}, {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_1 13.4.4.1} and Supplementary Material). According to the assessment in {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_1.12_4_1_2 Section 12.4.1.2}, global mean SAT change is likely to lie within the 5 to 95% range of the projections of CMIP5 models. Following this assessment, the 5 to 95% range of model results for each of the GMSL rise contributions that is projected on the basis of CMIP5 results is interpreted as the likely range.

Possible ice-sheet dynamical changes by 2100 are assessed from the published literature (Sections {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 13.4.3.2} and {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 13.4.4.2}), which as yet provides only a partial basis for making projections related to particular scenarios. They are thus treated as independent of scenario, except that a higher rate of change is used for Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} outflow under {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}. Projections of changes in {Glossary.*Land_water_storage land water storage} due to human intervention are also treated as independent of {Topics.*Scenarios emissions scenario}, because we do not have sufficient information to give ranges for individual scenarios. The scenario-independent treatment does not imply that the contributions concerned will not depend on the scenario followed, only that the current state of knowledge does not permit a quantitative assessment of the dependence. For each of these contributions, our assessment of the literature provides a 5-95% range for the late 21st century (2100 for Greenland and Antarctic ice-sheet dynamics, 2081-2100 for land water storage). For consistency with the treatment of the CMIP5-derived results, we interpret this range as the likely range. We assume that each of these contributions begins from its present-day rate and that the rate increases linearly in time, in order to interpolate from the present day to the late 21st century (see Supplementary Material for details).

The likely range of GMSL rise given for each RCP combines the uncertainty in global climate change, represented by the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} ({Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_1.12_4_1_2 Section 12.4.1.2}), with the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in modelling the contributions to GMSL. The part of the uncertainty related to the magnitude of global climate change is correlated among all the scenario-dependent contributions, while the methodological uncertainties are treated as independent (see also Supplementary Material).

The sum of the projected contributions gives the likely range for future GMSL rise. The median projections for GMSL in all scenarios lie within a range of 0.05 m until the middle of the century ({'Figure_13_11 Figure 13.11}), because the divergence of the climate projections has a delayed effect owing to the time-integrating characteristic of {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level}. By the late 21st century (over an interval of 95 years, between the 20-year mean of 2081–2100 and the 20-year mean of 1986–2005), they have a spread of about 0.25 m, with {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} giving the least amount of rise (0.40 [0.26 to 0.55] m) (likely range) and RCP8.5 giving the most (0.63 [0.45 to 0.82] m). {Glossary.*RCP4_5_and_RCP6_0 RCP4.5 and RCP6.0} are very similar at the end of the century (0.47 [0.32 to 0.63] m and 0.48 [0.33 to 0.63]] m respectively), but RCP4.5 has a greater rate of rise earlier in the century than RCP6.0 ({'Figure_13_10 Figure 13.10} and {'Table_13_5 Table 13.5}). At 2100, the likely ranges are 0.44 [0.28–0.61] m (RCP2.6), 0.53 [0.36–0.71] m (RCP4.5), 0.55 [0.38–0.73] m (RCP6.0), and 0.74 [0.52–0.98] m (RCP8.5).

{image:'Figure_13_10}

{image:'Figure_13_11}

In all scenarios, the rate of rise at the start of the RCP projections (2007–2013) is about 3.7 mm yr–1, slightly above the observational range of 3.2 [2.8 to 3.6] mm yr–1 for 1993–2010, because the modelled contributions for recent years, although consistent with observations for 1993–2010 ({Chapters.13.13_3 Section 13.3}), are all in the upper part of the observational ranges, perhaps related to the simulated rate of climatic warming being greater than has been observed ({Box_9_2 Box 9.2}). In the projections, the rate of rise initially increases. In RCP2.6 it becomes roughly constant (central projection 4.5 mm yr–1) before the middle of the century, and subsequently declines slightly. The rate of rise becomes roughly constant in RCP4.5 and RCP6.0 by the end of the century, whereas acceleration continues throughout the century in RCP8.5, reaching 11 [8 to 16] mm yr–1 in 2081–2100.

In all scenarios, thermal expansion is the largest contribution, accounting for about 30 to 55% of the projections. Glaciers are the next largest, accounting for 15-35% of the projections. By 2100, 15 to 55% of the present volume of glaciers outside Antarctica is projected to be eliminated under RCP2.6, and 35 to 85% under RCP8.5 (Table 13.SM.2). SMB change on the Greenland ice sheet makes a positive contribution, whereas SMB change in Antarctica gives a negative contribution (Sections {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_1 13.4.3.1} and {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_1 13.4.4.1}). The positive contribution due to rapid dynamical changes that result in increased ice outflow from both ice sheets together has a likely range of 0.03 to 0.20 m in RCP8.5 and 0.03 to 0.19 m in the other {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs}. There is a relatively small positive contribution from human intervention in land water storage, predominantly due to increasing extraction of groundwater.
