index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.2.3.4
title: 11.2.3.4 - Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 Decadal Prediction Experiments

Indices of global mean temperature, the Atlantic Multi-decadal Variability ({Glossary.*Atlantic_Multi_decadal_Oscillation_Variability AMV}; ({cite.11.'Trenberth_and_Shea_2006})) and the Inter-decadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO; {cite.11.'Power_et_al_1999}) or Pacific Decadal Oscillation ({Glossary.*Pacific_Decadal_Oscillation PDO}) are used as benchmarks to assess the ability of decadal forecast systems to predict multi-annual averages of {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} ({cite.11.'Kim_et_al_2012}; van Oldenborgh et al., 2012; Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013; {cite.11.'Goddard_et_al_2013}; see also {'Figure_11_3 Figure 11.3}). Initialized {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} of global mean surface air temperature (GMST) for the following year are now being performed in almost-real time ({cite.11.'Folland_et_al_2013}).

{image:'Figure_11_3}

Non-initialized predictions (or {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}) of the global mean temperature are statistically significantly skilful for most of the forecast ranges considered (high confidence), due to the almost monotonic increase in temperature, pointing to the importance of the time-varying RF ({cite.11.'Murphy_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Kim_et_al_2012}). This leads to a high (above 0.9) correlation of the {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} mean prediction that varies very as a function of forecast lead time. This holds whether the changes in the {Glossary.*External_forcing external forcing} (i.e., changes in natural and/or {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} atmospheric composition) are specified (i.e., CMIP5) or are projected (ENSEMBLES). The skill of the multi-annual global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} improves with initialization, although this is mainly evidenced when the accuracy is measured in terms of the RMSE (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013). An improved prediction of global mean {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} is evidenced by the closer fit of the initialized predictions during the 21st century ({'Figure_11_3 Figure 11.3}; {cite.11.'Meehl_and_Teng_2012}; Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013; {cite.11.'Guemas_et_al_2013}; {Box_9_2 Box 9.2}). The impact of initialization is seen as a better representation of the phase of the internal variability, in particular in increasing the upper ocean heat content ({cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2011}) and in terms of a correction of the model’s forced response.

The AMV ({Chapters.14 Chapter 14}) has important impacts on temperature and precipitation over land ({cite.11.'Li_and_Bates_2007}; {cite.11.'Li_et_al_2008}; {cite.11.'Semenov_et_al_2010}). The AMV index shows a large fraction of its variability on decadal time scales and has multi-year {Glossary.*Predictability predictability} ({cite.11.'Murphy_et_al_2010}; Garcia-Serrano and Doblas-Reyes, 2012). The AMV has been connected to multi-decadal variability of Atlantic tropical cyclones ({cite.11.'Goldenberg_et_al_2001}; {cite.11.'Zhang_and_Delworth_2006}; {cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Dunstone_et_al_2011}). {'Figure_11_3 Figure 11.3} shows that the CMIP5 multi-model ensemble mean has skill on multi-annual time scales, the skill being generally larger than for the single-model forecast systems (Garcia-Serrano and DoblasReyes, 2012; {cite.11.'Kim_et_al_2012}). The skill of the AMV index improves with initialization (high confidence) for the early forecast ranges. In particular, the RMSE is substantially reduced (indicating improved skill) with initialization for the AMV. The positive correlation of the non-initialized AMV predictions is consistent with the view that part of the recent variability is due to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcings} ({cite.11.'Evan_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'Ottera_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Chang_et_al_2011}; {cite.11.'Booth_et_al_2012}; Garcia-Serrano et al., 2012; {cite.11.'Terray_2012}; {cite.11.'Villarini_and_Vecchi_2012}; Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013).

{Glossary.*Pacific_decadal_variability Pacific decadal variability} is associated with potentially important climate impacts, including rainfall over America, Asia, Africa and Australia ({cite.11.'Power_et_al_1999}; {cite.11.'Deser_et_al_2004}; {cite.11.'Seager_et_al_2008}; {cite.11.'Zhu_et_al_2011}; {cite.11.'Li_et_al_2012}). The combination of Pacific and Atlantic variability and climate change is an important driver of multi-decadal USA {Glossary.*Drought drought} ({cite.11.'McCabe_et_al_2004}; {cite.11.'Burgman_et_al_2010}) including key events like the American dustbowl of the 1930s ({cite.11.'Schubert_et_al_2004}). van Oldenborgh et al. (2012) reported weak skill in hindcasting the IPO in the ENSEMBLES multi-model. Doblas-Reyes et al. (2013) show that the ensemble-mean skill of the ENSEMBLES multi-model IPO is not statistically significant at the 95% level and shows no clear impact of the initialization, in agreement with the predictability study of {cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2010 Meehl et al. (2010)}. On the other hand, case studies suggest that there might be some initial states that can produce skill in predicting IPO-related decadal variability for some time periods (e.g., {cite.11.'Chikamoto_et_al_2012b}; {cite.11.'Meehl_and_Arblaster_2012}; {cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2013a}).

The higher AMV and global mean temperature skill of the CMIP5 predictions with respect to the ENSEMBLES hindcasts (van Oldenborgh et al., 2012; {cite.11.'Goddard_et_al_2013}) might be partly due to the CMIP5 multi-model using specified instead of projected {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} loading (especially the volcanic aerosol) and solar irradiance variations during the simulations. As these forcings cannot be specified in a real forecast setting, ENSEMBLES offers an estimate of the skill closer to what could be expected from a real-time forecast system such as the one described in ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2013a}). The use of correct forcings nevertheless allows a more powerful test of the effect of initialization on the ability of models to reproduce past observations.

Near-term prediction systems have significant skill for temperature over large regions ({'Figure_11_4 Figure 11.4}), especially over the oceans ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2010}; Doblas-Reyes et al., 2011; {cite.11.'Kim_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'Matei_et_al_2012b}; van Oldenborgh et al., 2012; {cite.11.'Hanlon_et_al_2013}). It has been shown that a large part of the skill corresponds to the correct representation of the long-term {Glossary.*Trend trend} (high confidence) as the skill decreases substantially after an estimate of the long-term trend is removed from both the predictions and the observations (e.g., {cite.11.'Corti_et_al_2012}; van Oldenborgh et al., 2012; {cite.11.'MacLeod_et_al_2013}). Robust skill increase due to initialization ({'Figure_11_4 Figure 11.4}) is limited to areas of the North Atlantic, the Indian Ocean and the southeast Pacific (high confidence) ({cite.11.'DoblasReyes_et_al_2013}), in agreement with previous results ({cite.11.'Pohlmann_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Mochizuki_et_al_2012}) and predictability estimates ({cite.11.'Branstator_and_Teng_2012}). Similar results have been found in several individual forecast systems (e.g., {cite.11.'Muller_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'Bellucci_et_al_2013}). However, the impact of initialization on the skill in those regions, though robust (as shown by the agreement between the different CMIP5 systems) is small and not statistically significant with 90% confidence.

{image:'Figure_11_4}

The improvement in retrospective North Atlantic variability predictions from initialization ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Dunstone_et_al_2011}; {cite.11.'GarciaSerrano_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'Hazeleger_et_al_2013b}) suggests that internal variability was important to North Atlantic variability during the past few decades. However, the interpretation of the results is complicated by the fact that the impact on skill varies slightly with the forecast quality measure used ({'Figure_11_3 Figure 11.3}; Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013). This has been {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to, among other things, the different impact of the predicted local trends on the scores used ({cite.11.'Goddard_et_al_2013}). Skill in hindcasts of subpolar Atlantic temperature, which is evident in {'Figure_11_4 Figure 11.4}, is improved more by initialization than is skill in hindcasting sub-tropical Atlantic temperature (Garcia-Serrano et al., 2012; {cite.11.'Robson_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'Hazeleger_et_al_2013b}). This is relevant because the sub-polar branch of the AMV is a {Glossary.*Source source} of skill for multi-year North Atlantic tropical storm frequency predictions ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2010}). {cite.11.'Vecchi_et_al_2013 Vecchi et al. (2013)} argued that the nominal improvement in multi-year forecasts of North Atlantic hurricane frequency was mainly due to persistence.

{cite.11.'Sugiura_et_al_2009 Sugiura et al. (2009)} reported on skill in hindcasting the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO) in their forecast system. They ascribed the skill to the interplay between Rossby waves and a clockwise propagation of ocean heat content anomalies along the Kuroshio–Oyashio extension and subtropical {Glossary.*Subduction subduction} pathway. However, as {'Figure_11_4 Figure 11.4} shows, the Pacific Ocean has the lowest temperature skill overall, with no consistent impact from initialization. The central North Pacific has zero or negative skill, which may be due to the relatively large amplitude of the interannual variability when compared to the long-term trend; the overall failure to predict the largest warming events (Guémas et al., 2012) beyond a few months; and differences (compared to AMV) in how surface temperature and upper ocean heat content interact for the PDO ({cite.11.'Mochizuki_et_al_2010}; {cite.11.'Chikamoto_et_al_2012a}; {cite.11.'Mochizuki_et_al_2012}). There is a robust loss of skill due to initialization in the CMIP5 predictions over the equatorial Pacific (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013) that has not been adequately explained.

The AMV is thought to be related to the AMOC ({cite.11.'Knight_et_al_2005}). An assessment of the impact of observing systems on AMOC predictability indicates that the recent dense observations of oceanic temperature and salinity are crucial to constraining the AMOC in one model {cite.11.'Zhang_et_al_2007a Zhang et al. (2007a)}. The observing system representative of the pre-2000s was not as effective, indicating that inadequate observations in the past might also limit the impact of initialization on the predictions. This has been confirmed by {cite.11.'Pohlmann_et_al_2013 Pohlmann et al. (2013)} using decadal predictions, where they also find a positive impact from initialization that agrees with {cite.11.'Hazeleger_et_al_2013b Hazeleger et al. (2013b)}. Assessments of the skill of prediction systems to hindcast past variability in the AMOC have been attempted ({cite.11.'Pohlmann_et_al_2013}; {cite.11.'Swingedouw_et_al_2013}) although direct measures of the AMOC are far too short to underpin a reliable estimate of skill, and longer histories are poorly known ({cite.11.'Matei_et_al_2012a}; {cite.11.'Vecchi_et_al_2012}). There is very low confidence in current estimates of the skill of the AMOC hindcasts. Sustained ocean observations, such as Argo, a broad global array of temperature/salinity profiling floats, and Rapid Climate Change-{Glossary.*Meridional_Overturning_Circulation Meridional Overturning Circulation} and Heatflux Array (RAPID-MOCHA), will be needed to build a capability to reliably predict the AMOC ({cite.11.'Srokosz_et_al_2012}).

{Glossary.*Climate_prediction Climate prediction} is, by nature, probabilistic. Probabilistic predictions are expected to be skilful, but also reliable. Decadal predictions should be evaluated on the basis of whether they give an accurate estimation of the relative frequency of the predicted outcome. This question can be addressed using, among other tools, attributes diagrams ({cite.11.'Mason_2004}). They measure how closely the forecast probabilities of an event correspond to the mean probability of observing the event. They are based on a discrete binning of many forecast probabilities taken over a given geographical {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}. {'Figure_11_5 Figure 11.5} illustrates the CMIP5 multi-model Init and NoInit attributes diagrams for predictions of both the global and North Atlantic SSTs to be in the lower tercile (where the tercile threshold has been estimated separately for the predictions and the observations). The diagrams are constructed using predictions for each grid point over the corresponding area. For perfect reliability the forecast probability and the frequency of occurrence should be equal, and the plotted points should lie on the diagonal (solid black line in the figure). When the line joining the bullets (the reliability curve) has positive slope it indicates that as the forecast probability of the event increases, so does the chance of observing the event. The predictions therefore can be considered as moderately reliable. However, if the slope of the curve is less than the slope of the diagonal, then the forecast system is overconfident. If the reliability curve is mainly horizontal, then the frequency of occurrence of the event does not depend on the forecast probabilities and the predictions contain no more information than a random guess. An ideal forecast should have a good {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} whilst retaining reliability, that is, probability forecasts should be both sharp and reliable.

{image:'Figure_11_5}

In agreement with {cite.11.'Corti_et_al_2012 Corti et al. (2012)}, CMIP5 multi-model surface temperature predictions are more reliable for the North Atlantic than when considered over the global oceans, and have a tendency to be overconfident particularly for the global oceans (medium confidence). This means that the multi-model ensemble spread should not be considered as a robust measure of the actual {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty}, at least for multi-annual averages. The attributes diagrams already take into account the systematic error in the simulated variability by estimating separately the event thresholds for the predictions and the observational reference. For the North Atlantic, initialization improves the reliability of the predictions, which translates into an increase of the Brier skill score, the probabilistic skill measure with respect to a naïve climatological prediction (which is reliable, but not skilful) used to aggregate the information in the attributes diagram. However, the uncertainty associated with these estimates is not negligible. This is due mainly to the small sample of start dates, which has the consequence that the number of predictions with a given probability is small to give a robust estimate of the observed relative frequency ({cite.11.'Brocker_and_Smith_2007}). In addition to this, there are biases in the reliability diagram itself ({cite.11.'Ferro_and_Fricker_2012}). These results suggest that the multi-model ensemble should be used with care when estimating probability forecasts or the uncertainty of the mean predictions. Given that the models used for the dynamical predictions are the same as those used for the projections, this verification also provides useful information for the assessment of the projections (cf. {Box_11_2 Box 11.2}).

The skill in hindcasting precipitation over land ({'Figure_11_6 Figure 11.6}) is much lower than the skill in hindcasting temperature over land. This is consistent with predictability studies discussed previously (e.g., {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}) (high confidence). Several regions, especially in the Northern Hemisphere (NH) and West Africa ({cite.11.'Gaetani_and_Mohino_2013}), have skill but these regions are not statistically significant with a 95% confidence level. The positive skill in hindcasting precipitation can be attributed mostly to variable RF (high confidence) as initialization improves the skill very little ({cite.11.'Goddard_et_al_2013}). The areas with positive skill agree with those where the precipitation trends of multi-annual averages are the largest (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013). The skill in areas like West Africa might be associated with the positive AMV skill, as the AMV drives interannual variability in precipitation over this region (van Oldenborgh et al., 2012).

{image:'Figure_11_6}

The small amount of statistically significant differences found between the initialized and non-initialized experiments does not necessarily mean that the impact of the initialization does not have a physical basis. A comparison of the global mean temperature and AMV forecast quality using 1and 5-year intervals between start dates (Garcia-Serrano et al., 2012) suggests that, although a five-year interval sampling allows an estimate of the level of skill, local maxima as a function of forecast time might well be due to poor sampling of the start dates (Garcia-Serrano and Doblas-Reyes, 2012; {cite.11.'Kharin_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'DoblasReyes_et_al_2013}; {cite.11.'Goddard_et_al_2013}). Several signals, such as the skill improvement for temperature over the North Atlantic, are robust in the sense that it is found in more than 75% of forecast system. However, it is difficult to obtain statistical significance with these limited samples. The low start date sampling frequency is one of the limitations of the core CMIP5 near-term prediction experiment, the other one being the short length of the period of study, limited by the availability of observational data. Results estimated with yearly start dates are more robust than with a 5-year start date frequency. However, even with 1-year start date frequency, the impact of the initialization is similar. The spatial distribution of the skill does not change substantially with the different start date frequency. The skill and the initialization impact are both slightly reduced in the results with yearly start dates, but at the same time the spatial variability is substantially reduced.

The CMIP5 multi-model overestimates the spread of the multi-annual average temperature (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013). {'Figure_11_7 Figure 11.7} shows the ratio of the spread around the ensemble mean prediction and the RMSE of the ensemble mean prediction of Init and NoInit, which in a well-calibrated system is expected to be close to 1. However, the ratio is overestimated over the North Atlantic, the Indian Ocean and the Arctic, and underestimated over the North Pacific and most continental areas, suggesting that the CMIP5 systems do not discriminate between the regions where the spread should be reduced according to the RMSE level in the area. These results are found for both the Init and NoInit ensembles and agree with the overconfidence of the probability forecasts shown in {'Figure_11_6 Figure 11.6} ({cite.11.'Corti_et_al_2012}). The spread overestimation also agrees with the results found for the indices illustrate in {'Figure_11_3 Figure 11.3} (Doblas-Reyes et al., 2013). The spread overestimation points to the need for a careful interpretation of current ensemble and probabilistic climate information for climate adaptation and services.

{image:'Figure_11_7}

The skill of extreme daily temperature and precipitation in multi-annual time scales has also been assessed ({cite.11.'Eade_et_al_2012}; {cite.11.'Hanlon_et_al_2013}). There is little improvement in skill with the initialization beyond the first year, suggesting that skill then arises largely from the varying external forcing. The skill for extremes is generally similar to, but slightly lower than, that for the mean.

Responding to the increases in decadal skill in certain regions due to initialization, a coordinated quasi-operational decadal prediction initiative has been organized ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2013b}). The forecast systems participating in the initiative are based on those of CMIP5 and have been evaluated for forecast quality. Statistical predictions are also included in the initiative. The most recent forecast shows (compared to the projections) substantial warming of the north Atlantic subpolar {Glossary.*Gyre gyre}, cooling of the north Pacific throughout the next decade and cooling over most land and ocean regions and in the global average out to several years ahead. However, in the absence of explosive or frequent volcanic eruptions, global surface temperature is predicted to continue to rise and, to a certain degree, recover from the reduced rate of warming (see {Box_9_2 Box 9.2}).
