index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.6.3
title: 9.6.3 - Skill of Downscaling Methods

{Glossary.*Downscaling Downscaling} skill varies with location, season, parameter and boundary conditions (see {Chapters.9.9_6.9_6_5 Section 9.6.5}) (e.g., {cite.9.'Schmidli_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Maurer_and_Hidalgo_2008}). Although there are indications that model skill increases with higher {Glossary.*Resolution resolution}, it does not do so linearly. {cite.9.'Rojas_2006 Rojas (2006)} found more improvement when increasing resolution from 135 km to 45 km than from 45 km to 15 km. {cite.9.'Walther_et_al_2013 Walther et al. (2013)} found that the diurnal precipitation cycle and light precipitation improved more when going from 12 km to 6 km resolution than when going from 50 km to 25 km or from 25 km to 12 km. Higher resolution does enable better simulation of extremes ({cite.9.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}). For example, {cite.9.'Pryor_et_al_2012 Pryor et al. (2012)} noted that an increase in RCM resolution from 50 km to 6 km increased extreme wind speeds more than the mean wind speed. {cite.9.'Kawazoe_and_Gutowski_2013 Kawazoe and Gutowski (2013)} compared six {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model RCMs} and the two {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} to high resolution observations, concluding that precipitation extremes were more representative in the RCMs than in the {Glossary.*Semi_empirical_model GCMs}. {cite.9.'Vautard_et_al_2013 Vautard et al. (2013)} found that warm extremes in Europe were generally better simulated in RCMs with 12 km resolution compared to 50 km. {cite.9.'Kendon_et_al_2012 Kendon et al. (2012)} and {cite.9.'Chan_et_al_2012 Chan et al. (2012)} found mixed results in daily precipitation simulated at 12 km and 1.5 km resolution, although the latter had improved sub-daily features, perhaps as {Glossary.*Convection convection} could be explicitly resolved.

Coupled RCMs, with an interactive ocean, offer further improvements. Döscher et al. (2010) reproduced empirical relationships between Arctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} extent and sea ice thickness and {Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation NAO} in a coupled RCM. {cite.9.'Zou_and_Zhou_2013 Zou and Zhou (2013)} found that a regional ocean–{Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} model improved the simulation of precipitation over the western North Pacific compared to an uncoupled model. {cite.9.'Samuelsson_et_al_2010 Samuelsson et al. (2010)} showed that coupling a lake model with an RCM captured the effect of lakes on the air temperature over adjacent land. {cite.9.'Lenaerts_et_al_2012 Lenaerts et al. (2012)} added drifting snow in an RCM run for the Antarctica, which increased the area of ablation and improved the fit to observations. {cite.9.'Smith_et_al_2011a Smith et al. (2011a)} added vegetation dynamics–{Glossary.*Ecosystem ecosystem} biogeochemistry into an RCM, and found some evidence of local {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} to air temperature.

Applying an RCM developed for a specific {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} to other regions exposes it to a wider range of conditions and therefore provides an opportunity for more rigorous evaluation. Transferability experiments target this by running RCMs for different regions while holding their process-descriptions constant (cf. {cite.9.'Takle_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Gbobaniyi_et_al_2011}; {cite.9.'Jacob_et_al_2012}). {cite.9.'Suh_et_al_2012 Suh et al. (2012)} noted that 10 RCMs run for Africa did well overall for average and maximum temperature, but systematically overestimated the daily minimum temperature. Precipitation was generally simulated betted for wet regions than for dry regions. Similarly, {cite.9.'Nikulin_et_al_2012 Nikulin et al. (2012)} reported on 10 RCMs over Africa, run with boundary conditions from ERA-Interim, and evaluated against different observational data sets. Many of the RCMs simulated precipitation better than the ERA-Interim {Topics.*Reanalysis reanalysis} itself.

{cite.9.'Christensen_et_al_2010 Christensen et al. (2010)} examined a range metrics related to simulation of extremes, mesoscale features, trends, aspects of variability and consistency with the driving boundary conditions. Only one of these metrics led to clear differentiation among RCMs ({cite.9.'Lenderink_2010}). This may imply a general skilfulness of models, but may also simply indicate that the metrics were not very informative. Nevertheless, using some of these metrics, {cite.9.'Coppola_et_al_2010 Coppola et al. (2010)} and Kjellström et al. (2010) found that weighted sets of RCMs outperformed sets without weighting for both temperature and precipitation. {cite.9.'Sobolowski_and_Pavelsky_2012 Sobolowski and Pavelsky (2012)} demonstrated a similar impact.
