index: hide
name: Secondary Immunodeficiency

A  **secondary immunodeficiency** occurs as a result an acquired impairment of function of B cells, T cells, or both. Secondary immunodeficiencies can be caused by:

  * Systemic disorders such as  **diabetes mellitus**,  **malnutrition**,  **hepatitis**, or  **HIV infection**
  * Immunosuppressive treatments such as cytotoxic  **chemotherapy**,  **bone marrow ablation** before transplantation, or  **radiation therapy**
  * Prolonged critical illness due to infection, surgery, or trauma in the very young, elderly, or hospitalized patients

Unlike primary immunodeficiencies, which have a genetic basis, secondary immunodeficiencies are often reversible if the underlying cause is resolved. Patients with secondary immunodeficiencies develop an increased susceptibility to an otherwise benign infection by  **opportunistic pathogens** such as  **Candida** spp.,  *P. jirovecii*, and  **Cryptosporidium**.

 **HIV** infection and the associated  **acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS)** are the best-known secondary immunodeficiencies. AIDS is characterized by profound CD4 T-cell  **lymphopenia** (decrease in lymphocytes). The decrease in CD4 T cells is the result of various mechanisms, including HIV-induced  **pyroptosis** (a type of  **apoptosis** that stimulates an inflammatory response), viral cytopathic effect, and cytotoxicity to HIV-infected cells.

The most common cause of secondary immunodeficiency worldwide is severe malnutrition, which affects both innate and adaptive immunity. More research and information are needed for the more common causes of secondary immunodeficiency; however, the number of new discoveries in AIDS research far exceeds that of any other single cause of secondary immunodeficiency. AIDS research has paid off extremely well in terms of discoveries and treatments; increased research into the most common cause of immunodeficiency, malnutrition, would likely be as beneficial.

 summarizes primary and secondary immunodeficiencies, their effects on immune function, and typical outcomes.


****

| Disease | Effect on Immune Function | Outcomes |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Primary immunodeficiencies | Chronic granulomatous disease | Impaired killing of bacteria within the phagolysosome of neutrophils and macrophages | Chronic infections and granulomas |
| Selective IgA deficiency | Inability to produce secretory IgA | Predisposition to lung and gastrointestinal infections |
| Severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) | Deficient humoral and cell-mediated immune responses | Early development of severe and life-threatening opportunistic infections |
| X-linked agammaglobulinemia | Flawed differentiation of B cells and absence of specific antibodies | Recurrent infections almost exclusively due to pathogens that cause pyogenic infections |
| Secondary immunodeficiencies | Immunosuppressive therapies (e.g., chemotherapy, radiotherapy) | Impaired humoral and/or cell-mediated immune responses | Opportunistic infections, rare cancers |
| Malnutrition | Impaired humoral and/or cell-mediated immune responses | Opportunistic infections, rare cancers |
| Viral infection (e.g., HIV) | Impaired cell-mediated immune responses due to CD4 T-cell lymphopenia | Opportunistic infections, rare cancers |
    
