index: hide
name: Primary Immunodeficiency

Primary immunodeficiencies, which number more than 250, are caused by inherited defects of either nonspecific innate or specific adaptive immune defenses. In general, patients born with primary immunodeficiency (PI) commonly have an increased susceptibility to infection. This susceptibility can become apparent shortly after birth or in early childhood for some individuals, whereas other patients develop symptoms later in life. Some primary immunodeficiencies are due to a defect of a single cellular or humoral component of the immune system; others may result from defects of more than one component. Examples of primary immunodeficiencies include chronic granulomatous disease, X-linked agammaglobulinemia, selective IgA deficiency, and severe combined immunodeficiency disease.

## Chronic Granulomatous Disease

The causes of  **chronic granulomatous disease** (CGD) are defects in the  **NADPH oxidase** system of phagocytic cells, including  **neutrophils** and  **macrophages**, that prevent the production of  **superoxide radicals** in phagolysosomes. The inability to produce superoxide radicals impairs the antibacterial activity of  **phagocytes**. As a result, infections in patients with CGD persist longer, leading to a chronic local inflammation called a  **granuloma**. Microorganisms that are the most common causes of infections in patients with CGD include  **Aspergillus** spp.,  **Staphylococcus aureus**,  **Chromobacterium violaceum**,  **Serratia marcescens**, and  **Salmonella typhimurium**.

## X-Linked Agammaglobulinemia

Deficiencies in B cells due to defective differentiation lead to a lack of specific antibody production known as  **X-linked agammaglobulinemia**. In 1952, Ogden C.  **Bruton** (1908–2003) described the first immunodeficiency in a boy whose immune system failed to produce antibodies. This defect is inherited on the X chromosome and is characterized by the absence of immunoglobulin in the serum; it is called  **Bruton X-linked agammaglobulinemia** (XLA). The defective gene,  *BTK,* in XLA is now known to encode a  **tyrosine kinase** called Bruton tyrosine kinase (Btk). In patients whose B cells are unable to produce sufficient amounts of Btk, the  **B-cell maturation** and differentiation halts at the pre-B-cell stage of growth. B-cell maturation and differentiation beyond the pre-B-cell stage of growth is required for immunoglobulin production. Patients who lack antibody production suffer from recurrent infections almost exclusively due to  **extracellular pathogens** that cause pyogenic infections:  **Haemophilus influenzae**,  **Streptococcus pneumoniae**,  *S. pyogenes*, and  *S. aureus*. Because cell-mediated immunity is not impaired, these patients are not particularly vulnerable to infections caused by viruses or intracellular pathogens.

## Selective IgA Deficiency

The most common inherited form of immunoglobulin deficiency is  **selective IgA deficiency**, affecting about one in 800 people. Individuals with selective IgA deficiency produce normal levels of IgG and IgM, but are not able to produce  **secretory IgA**. IgA deficiency predisposes these individuals to lung and gastrointestinal infections for which secretory IgA is normally an important defense mechanism. Infections in the lungs and  **gastrointestinal tract** can involve a variety of pathogens, including  *H. influenzae*,  *S. pneumoniae*,  **Moraxella catarrhalis**,  *S. aureus*,  **Giardia lamblia**, or pathogenic strains of  **Escherichia coli**.

## Severe Combined Immunodeficiency

Patients who suffer from  **severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID)** have B-cell and T-cell defects that impair  **T-cell dependent antibody response**s as well as  **cell-mediated immune response**s. Patients with  **SCID** also cannot develop immunological memory, so  **vaccine**s provide them no protection, and live attenuated vaccines (e.g., for varicella-zoster, measles virus, rotavirus, poliovirus) can actually cause the infection they are intended to prevent. The most common form is  **X-linked SCID**, which accounts for nearly 50% of all cases and occurs primarily in males. Patients with SCID are typically diagnosed within the first few months of life after developing severe, often life-threatening, opportunistic infection by  **Candida** spp.,  **Pneumocystis jirovecii**, or pathogenic strains of  **E. coli**.

Without treatment, babies with SCID do not typically survive infancy. In some cases, a  **bone marrow transplant** may successfully correct the defects in lymphocyte development that lead to the SCID phenotype, by replacing the defective component. However, this treatment approach is not without risks, as demonstrated by the famous case of David Vetter (1971–1984), better known as “Bubble Boy” ({'Figure_19_4_SCID Figure 19.4.SCID}). Vetter, a patient with SCID who lived in a protective plastic bubble to prevent exposure to opportunistic microbes, received a bone marrow transplant from his sister. Because of a latent Epstein-Barr virus infection in her bone marrow, however, he developed mononucleosis and died of Burkitt lymphoma at the age of 12 years.


{image:'Figure_19_4_SCID}
        
