index: hide
name: Vector Addition: Head-to-Tail Method

The  **head-to-tail method** is a graphical way to add vectors, described in {'Figure_3_2_3 Figure 3.2.3} below and in the steps following. The  **tail** of the vector is the starting point of the vector, and the  **head** (or tip) of a vector is the final, pointed end of the arrow.


{image:'Figure_3_2_3}
        

 **Step 1.** *Draw an arrow to represent the first vector (9 blocks to the east) using a ruler and protractor*.


{image:'Figure_3_2_4a}
        

 **Step 2.** Now draw an arrow to represent the second vector (5 blocks to the north).  *Place the tail of the second vector at the head of the first vector*.


{image:'Figure_3_2_5a}
        

 **Step 3.** *If there are more than two vectors, continue this process for each vector to be added. Note that in our example, we have only two vectors, so we have finished placing arrows tip to tail*.

 **Step 4.** *Draw an arrow from the tail of the first vector to the head of the last vector*. This is the  **resultant**, or the sum, of the other vectors.


{image:'Figure_3_2_6a}
        

 **Step 5.** To get the  **magnitude** of the resultant,  *measure its length with a ruler. (Note that in most calculations, we will use the Pythagorean theorem to determine this length.)*

 **Step 6.**To get the  **direction** of the resultant,  *measure the angle it makes with the reference frame using a protractor. (Note that in most calculations, we will use trigonometric relationships to determine this angle.)*

The graphical addition of vectors is limited in accuracy only by the precision with which the drawings can be made and the precision of the measuring tools. It is valid for any number of vectors.
