index: hide
name: Collecting Ducts and Recovery of Water

Solutes move across the membranes of the collecting ducts, which contain two distinct cell types, principal cells and intercalated cells. A  **principal cell** possesses channels for the recovery or loss of sodium and potassium. An  **intercalated cell** secretes or absorbs acid or bicarbonate. As in other portions of the nephron, there is an array of micromachines (pumps and channels) on display in the membranes of these cells.

Regulation of urine volume and osmolarity are major functions of the collecting ducts. By varying the amount of water that is recovered, the collecting ducts play a major role in maintaining the body’s normal osmolarity. If the blood becomes hyperosmotic, the collecting ducts recover more water to dilute the blood; if the blood becomes hyposmotic, the collecting ducts recover less of the water, leading to concentration of the blood. Another way of saying this is: If plasma osmolarity rises, more water is recovered and urine volume decreases; if plasma osmolarity decreases, less water is recovered and urine volume increases. This function is regulated by the posterior pituitary hormone ADH (vasopressin). With mild dehydration, plasma osmolarity rises slightly. This increase is detected by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus, which stimulates the release of ADH from the posterior pituitary. If plasma osmolarity decreases slightly, the opposite occurs.

When stimulated by ADH, aquaporin channels are inserted into the apical membrane of principal cells, which line the collecting ducts. As the ducts descend through the medulla, the osmolarity surrounding them increases (due to the countercurrent mechanisms described above). If aquaporin water channels are present, water will be osmotically pulled from the collecting duct into the surrounding interstitial space and into the peritubular capillaries. Therefore, the final urine will be more concentrated. If less ADH is secreted, fewer aquaporin channels are inserted and less water is recovered, resulting in dilute urine. By altering the number of aquaporin channels, the volume of water recovered or lost is altered. This, in turn, regulates the blood osmolarity, blood pressure, and osmolarity of the urine.

As Na<sup>+</sup> is pumped from the forming urine, water is passively recaptured for the circulation; this preservation of vascular volume is critically important for the maintenance of a normal blood pressure. Aldosterone is secreted by the adrenal cortex in response to angiotensin II stimulation. As an extremely potent vasoconstrictor, angiotensin II functions immediately to increase blood pressure. By also stimulating aldosterone production, it provides a longer-lasting mechanism to support blood pressure by maintaining vascular volume (water recovery).

In addition to receptors for ADH, principal cells have receptors for the steroid hormone aldosterone. While ADH is primarily involved in the regulation of water recovery, aldosterone regulates Na<sup>+</sup> recovery. Aldosterone stimulates principal cells to manufacture luminal Na<sup>+</sup> and K<sup>+</sup> channels as well as Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> ATPase pumps on the basal membrane of the cells. When aldosterone output increases, more Na<sup>+</sup> is recovered from the forming urine and water follows the Na<sup>+</sup> passively. As the pump recovers Na<sup>+</sup> for the body, it is also pumping K<sup>+</sup> into the forming urine, since the pump moves K<sup>+</sup> in the opposite direction. When aldosterone decreases, more Na<sup>+</sup> remains in the forming urine and more K<sup>+</sup> is recovered in the circulation. Symport channels move Na<sup>+</sup> and Cl<sup>– </sup>together. Still other channels in the principal cells secrete K<sup>+</sup> into the collecting duct in direct proportion to the recovery of Na<sup>+</sup>.

Intercalated cells play significant roles in regulating blood pH. Intercalated cells reabsorb K<sup>+</sup> and HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup> while secreting H<sup>+</sup>. This function lowers the acidity of the plasma while increasing the acidity of the urine.
