index: hide
name: Reabsorption and Secretion in the Distal Convoluted Tubule

Approximately 80 percent of filtered water has been recovered by the time the dilute forming urine enters the DCT. The DCT will recover another 10–15 percent before the forming urine enters the collecting ducts. Aldosterone increases the amount of Na<sup>+</sup>/K<sup>+</sup> ATPase in the basal membrane of the DCT and collecting duct. The movement of Na<sup>+</sup> out of the lumen of the collecting duct creates a negative charge that promotes the movement of Cl<sup>– </sup>out of the lumen into the interstitial space by a paracellular route across tight junctions. Peritubular capillaries receive the solutes and water, returning them to the circulation.

Cells of the DCT also recover Ca<sup>++</sup> from the filtrate. Receptors for parathyroid hormone (PTH) are found in DCT cells and when bound to PTH, induce the insertion of calcium channels on their luminal surface. The channels enhance Ca<sup>++</sup> recovery from the forming urine. In addition, as Na<sup>+</sup> is pumped out of the cell, the resulting electrochemical gradient attracts Ca<sup>++</sup> into the cell. Finally, calcitriol (1,25 dihydroxyvitamin D, the active form of vitamin D) is very important for calcium recovery. It induces the production of calcium-binding proteins that transport Ca<sup>++</sup> into the cell. These binding proteins are also important for the movement of calcium inside the cell and aid in exocytosis of calcium across the basolateral membrane. Any Ca<sup>++</sup> not reabsorbed at this point is lost in the urine.
