index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.2.1
title: 8.7.2.1 - Metrics for Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, Halocarbons and Related Compounds

Updated (A){Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP} and (A)GTP values for {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}, {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}, {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O}, CFCs, HCFCs, bromofluorocarbons, halons, HFCs, PFCs, SF6, NF3, and related halogencontaining compounds are given for some illustrative and tentative time horizons in {'Table_8_7 Tables 8.7}, 8.A.1 and Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.16. The input data and methods for calculations of GWPs and GTPs are documented in the Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.13. Indirect GWPs that account for the RF caused by depletion of stratospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} (consistent with {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_3 Section 8.3.3}) are given for selected gases in Table 8.A.2.

The confidence in the ability to provide useful metrics at time scales of several centuries is very low due to nonlinear effects, large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} for multi-century processes and strong assumptions of constant background conditions. Thus, we do not give {Glossary.*Metric metric} values for longer time scales than 100 years (see discussion in Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.11). However, these time scales are important to consider for gases such as CO2, SF6 and PFCs. For CO2, as much as 20 to 40% of the initial increase in concentration remains after 500 years. For PFC14, 99% of an emission is still in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} after 500 years. The effects of {Topics.*Emissions emissions} on these time scales are discussed in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12}.

The GWP values have changed from previous assessments due to new estimates of lifetimes, impulse response functions and radiative efficiencies. These are updated due to improved knowledge and/or changed background levels. Because CO2 is used as reference, any changes for this gas will affect all metric values via AGWP changes. {'Figure_8_31 Figure 8.31} shows how the values of radiative efficiency (RE), integrated impulse response function (IRF) and consequentially AGWP for CO2 have changed from earlier assessments relative to AR5 values. The net effect of change in RE and IRF is an increase of approximately 1% and 6% from {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} to AR5 in AGWP for CO2 for 20 and 100 years, respectively (see Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12). These increases in the AGWP of the reference gas lead to corresponding decreases in the GWPs for all non-CO2 gases. Continued increases in the atmospheric levels of CO2 will lead to further changes in GWPs (and GTPs) in the future.

{image:'Figure_8_31}

To understand the factors contributing to changes relative to AR4, comparisons are made here using the AR5 values that include climate– carbon feedbacks for CO2 only. Relative to AR4 the CH4 AGWP has changed due to changes in perturbation {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime}, a minor change in RE due to an increase in background concentration, and changes in the estimates of indirect effects. The indirect effects on O3 and stratospheric H2O are accounted for by increasing the effect of CH4 by 50% and 15%, respectively (see Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.12). The ozone effect has doubled since AR4 taking into account more recent studies as detailed in Sections {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_3 8.3.3} and {Chapters.8.8_5.8_5_1 8.5.1}. Together with the changes in AGWP for CO2 the net effect is increased GWP values of CH4.

The GWPs for N2O are lower here compared to AR4. A longer perturbation lifetime is used in AR5, while the radiative efficiency is lower due to increased abundances of CH4 and N2O. In addition, the reduction in CH4 via stratospheric O3, UV fluxes and OH levels due to increased N2O abundance is included in GWPs and GTP. Owing to large uncertainties related to altitude of changes, we do not include the RF from stratospheric ozone changes as an indirect effect of N2O.

Lifetimes for most of the {Glossary.*Halocarbons halocarbons} are taken from {cite.8.'WMO_2011 WMO (2011)} and many of these have changed from AR4. The lifetimes of {Glossary.*CFC CFC}-114, CFC115 and HCF-161 are reduced by approximately 40%, while {Glossary.*HFC HFC}-152 is reduced by one third. Among the hydrofluoroethers (HFEs) there are also several large changes in lifetimes. In addition, substantial updates of radiative efficiencies are made for several important gases; CFC11, CFC-115, {Glossary.*HCFC HCFC}-124, HCFC-225cb, HFC-143a, HFC-245fa, CCl4, CHCl3, and SF6. The radiative efficiency for carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) is higher now and the GWP100 has increased by almost 25% from AR4. Uncertainties in metric values are given in {Chapters.8.8_7.8_7_1.8_7_1_4 Section 8.7.1.4}. See also Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.12 and footnote to Table 8.A.1. As can be seen from Table 8.A.2, some ODS have strong indirect effects through stratospheric ozone {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}, which for some of the gases reduce their net GWP100 values substantially (and for the halons, to large negative values). Note that, consistent with {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_3 Section 8.3.3}, the uncertainties are large; ±100% for this indirect effect.

When climate-carbon feedbacks are included for both the non-CO2 and reference gases, all metric values increase relative to the methodology used in AR4, sometimes greatly ({'Table_8_7 Table 8.7}, Supplementary Material Table 8.SM.16). Though the uncertainties range for these metric values is greater, as uncertainties in climate-carbon feedbacks are substantial, these calculations provide a more consistent methodology.
