index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.2.3.1
title: 7.2.3.1 - Challenges of Parameterization

The representation of cloud microphysical processes in {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} is particularly challenging, in part because some of the fundamental details of these microphysical processes are poorly understood (particularly for iceand mixed-phase clouds), and because spatial heterogeneity of key atmospheric properties occurs at scales significantly smaller than a GCM grid box. Such representation, however, affects many aspects of a model’s overall simulated climate including the Hadley circulation, precipitation patterns, and tropical variability. Therefore continuing weakness in these parameterizations affects not only modeled {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity}, but also the fidelity with which these other variables can be simulated or projected.

Most CMIP5 climate model simulations use horizontal resolutions of 100 to 200 km in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}, with vertical layers varying between 100 m near the surface to more than 1000 m aloft. Within regions of this size in the real world, there is usually enormous small-scale variability in cloud properties, associated with variability in humidity, temperature and vertical motion ({'Figure_7_16 Figure 7.16}). This variability must be accounted for to accurately simulate cloud–radiation interaction, condensation, evaporation and precipitation and other cloud processes that crucially depend on how cloud condensate is distributed across each grid box ({cite.7.'Cahalan_et_al_1994}; {cite.7.'Pincus_and_Klein_2000}; {cite.7.'Larson_et_al_2001}; {cite.7.'Barker_et_al_2003}).

The simulation of clouds in modern climate models involves several parameterizations that must work in unison. These include {Glossary.*Parameterization parameterization} of turbulence, cumulus {Glossary.*Convection convection}, microphysical processes, radiative transfer and the resulting cloud amount (including the vertical overlap between different grid levels), as well as sub-grid scale transport of {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} and chemical species. The system of parameterizations must balance simplicity, realism, computational stability and efficiency. Many cloud processes are unrealistic in current {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs}, and as such their cloud response to climate change remains uncertain.

Cloud processes and/or turbulence parameterization are important not only for the {Glossary.*Semi_empirical_model GCMs} used in climate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} but also for specialized chemistry–aerosol–climate models (see review by {cite.7.'Zhang_2008}),  for {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} models, and indeed for the cloud process models described in {Chapters.7.7_2.7_2_2 Section 7.2.2} which must still parameterize small-scale and microphysical effects. The nature of the parameterization problem, however, shifts as model scale decreases. {Chapters.7.7_2.7_2_3.7_2_3_2 Section 7.2.3.2} briefly assesses recent developments relevant to GCMs.
