index: hide
name: Food Chains and Food Webs

The term “food chain” is sometimes used metaphorically to describe human social situations. Individuals who are considered successful are seen as being at the top of the food chain, consuming all others for their benefit, whereas the less successful are seen as being at the bottom.

The scientific understanding of a food chain is more precise than in its everyday usage. In ecology, a  **food chain** is a linear sequence of organisms through which nutrients and energy pass: primary producers, primary consumers, and higher-level consumers are used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics. There is a single path through the chain. Each organism in a food chain occupies what is called a  **trophic level**. Depending on their role as producers or consumers, species or groups of species can be assigned to various trophic levels.

In many ecosystems, the bottom of the food chain consists of photosynthetic organisms (plants and/or phytoplankton), which are called  **primary producers**. The organisms that consume the primary producers are herbivores: the  **primary consumers**.  **Secondary consumers** are usually carnivores that eat the primary consumers.  **Tertiary consumers** are carnivores that eat other carnivores. Higher-level consumers feed on the next lower tropic levels, and so on, up to the organisms at the top of the food chain: the  **apex consumers**. In the Lake Ontario food chain shown in {'Figure_46_1_3 Figure 46.1.3}, the Chinook salmon is the apex consumer at the top of this food chain.


{image:'Figure_46_1_3}
        

One major factor that limits the length of food chains is energy. Energy is lost as heat between each trophic level due to the second law of thermodynamics. Thus, after a limited number of trophic energy transfers, the amount of energy remaining in the food chain may not be great enough to support viable populations at yet a higher trophic level.

The loss of energy between trophic levels is illustrated by the pioneering studies of Howard T. Odum in the Silver Springs, Florida, ecosystem in the 1940s ({'Figure_46_1_4 Figure 46.1.4}). The primary producers generated 20,819 kcal/m<sup>2</sup>/yr (kilocalories per square meter per year), the primary consumers generated 3368 kcal/m<sup>2</sup>/yr, the secondary consumers generated 383 kcal/m<sup>2</sup>/yr, and the tertiary consumers only generated 21 kcal/m<sup>2</sup>/yr. Thus, there is little energy remaining for another level of consumers in this ecosystem.


{image:'Figure_46_1_4}
        

There is a one problem when using food chains to accurately describe most ecosystems. Even when all organisms are grouped into appropriate trophic levels, some of these organisms can feed on species from more than one trophic level; likewise, some of these organisms can be eaten by species from multiple trophic levels. In other words, the linear model of ecosystems, the food chain, is not completely descriptive of ecosystem structure. 	A holistic model—which accounts for all the interactions between different species and their complex interconnected relationships with each other and with the environment—is a more accurate and descriptive model for ecosystems. A  **food web** is a graphic representation of a holistic, nonlinear web of primary producers, primary consumers, and higher-level consumers used to describe ecosystem structure and dynamics ({'Figure_B46_1_5 Figure B46.1.5}).


{image:'Figure_B46_1_5}
        

A comparison of the two types of structural ecosystem models shows strength in both. Food chains are more flexible for analytical modeling, are easier to follow, and are easier to experiment with, whereas food web models more accurately represent ecosystem structure and dynamics, and data can be directly used as input for simulation modeling.

Two general types of food webs are often shown interacting within a single ecosystem. A  **grazing food web** (such as the Lake Ontario food web in {'Figure_B46_1_5 Figure B46.1.5}) has plants or other photosynthetic organisms at its base, followed by herbivores and various carnivores. A  **detrital food web** consists of a base of organisms that feed on decaying organic matter (dead organisms), called decomposers or detritivores. These organisms are usually bacteria or fungi that recycle organic material back into the biotic part of the ecosystem as they themselves are consumed by other organisms. As all ecosystems require a method to recycle material from dead organisms, most grazing food webs have an associated detrital food web. For example, in a meadow ecosystem, plants may support a grazing food web of different organisms, primary and other levels of consumers, while at the same time supporting a detrital food web of bacteria, fungi, and detrivorous invertebrates feeding off dead plants and animals.
