index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.5.5.8.2
title: 12.5.5.8.2 - Monsoonal circulation

{Topics.*Climate_Modelling Climate model} simulations and paleo-reconstructions provide evidence of past abrupt changes in Saharan vegetation, with the ‘green Sahara’ conditions ({cite.12.'Hoelzmann_et_al_1998}) of the African Humid Period (AHP) during the mid-{Glossary.*Holocene Holocene} serving as the most recent example. However, {cite.12.'Mitchell_1990 Mitchell (1990)} and {cite.12.'Claussen_et_al_2003 Claussen et al. (2003)} note that the mid-Holocene is not a direct analogue for future GHG-induced climate change since the forcings are different: a increased shortwave forcing in the NH summer versus a globally and seasonally uniform atmospheric {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} increase, respectively. {Glossary.*Paleoclimate Paleoclimate} examples suggest that a strong radiative or {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} forcing is needed to achieve a {Glossary.*Rapid_climate_change rapid climate change}, and that the rapid changes are reversible when the forcing is withdrawn. Both the abrupt onset and termination of the AHP were triggered when northern African summer {Glossary.*Insolation insolation} was 4.2% higher than present day, representing a local increase of about 19 W m–2 ({cite.12.'deMenocal_et_al_2000}). Note that the globally averaged radiative {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} from 1750 to 2011 ({'Table_8_6 Table 8.6}) is small compared to this local increase in insolation. A rapid Saharan greening has been simulated in a climate model of intermediate complexity forced by a rapid increase in atmospheric CO2, with the overall extent of greening depending on the equilibrium atmospheric CO2 level reached ({cite.12.'Claussen_et_al_2003}).

Abrupt Saharan vegetation changes of the {Glossary.*Younger_Dryas Younger Dryas} are linked with a rapid AMOC weakening which is considered very unlikely during the 21st century and unlikely beyond that as a consequence of global warming.

Studies with conceptual models ({cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2005}; {cite.12.'Levermann_et_al_2009}) have shown that the Indian summer {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon} can operate in two stable regimes: besides the ‘wet’ summer monsoon, a stable state exists which is characterized by low precipitation over India. These studies suggest that any perturbation of the radiative budget that tends to weaken the driving pressure gradient has the potential to induce abrupt transitions between these two regimes.

Numerous studies with coupled ocean–{Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} models have explored the potential impact of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forcing on the Indian monsoon (see also {Chapters.14.14_2 Section 14.2}). When forced with anticipated increases in GHG concentrations, the majority of these studies show an intensification of the rainfall associated with the Indian summer monsoon ({cite.12.'Meehl_and_Washington_1993}; {cite.12.'Kitoh_et_al_1997}; {cite.12.'Douville_et_al_2000}; {cite.12.'Hu_et_al_2000}; {cite.12.'May_2002}; {cite.12.'Ueda_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Kripalani_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Stowasser_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Cherchi_et_al_2010}). Despite the intensification of precipitation, several of these modelling studies show a weakening of the summer monsoon circulation ({cite.12.'Kitoh_et_al_1997}; {cite.12.'May_2002}; {cite.12.'Ueda_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Kripalani_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Stowasser_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Cherchi_et_al_2010}). The net effect is nevertheless an increase of precipitation due to enhanced moisture transport into the Asian monsoon {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} ({cite.12.'Ueda_et_al_2006}). In recent years, studies with {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} have also explored the direct effect of {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing on the Indian monsoon ({cite.12.'Lau_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Randles_and_Ramaswamy_2008}; {cite.12.'Collier_and_Zhang_2009}). Considering absorbing aerosols ({Glossary.*Black_carbon black carbon}) only, {cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2008 Meehl et al. (2008)} found an increase in pre-monsoonal precipitation, but a decrease in summer monsoon precipitation over parts of South Asia. In contrast, {cite.12.'Lau_et_al_2006 Lau et al. (2006)} found an increase in May–June–July precipitation in that region. If an increase in scattering aerosols only is considered, the monsoon circulation weakens and precipitation is inhibited ({cite.12.'Randles_and_Ramaswamy_2008}). More recently, {cite.12.'Bollasina_et_al_2011 Bollasina et al. (2011)} showed that anthropogenic aerosols played a fundamental role in driving the recent observed weakening of the summer monsoon. Given that the effect of increased atmospheric regional loading of aerosols is opposed by the concomitant increases in GHG concentrations, it is unlikely that an abrupt transition to the dry summer monsoon regime will be triggered in the 21st century.
