index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.1.1.1
title: 8.1.1.1 - Defining Radiative Forcing

Alternative definitions of RF have been developed, each with its own advantages and limitations. The instantaneous RF refers to an instantaneous change in net (down minus up) radiative flux (shortwave plus longwave; in W m–2) due to an imposed change. This forcing is usually defined in terms of flux changes at the top of the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} (TOA) or at the climatological {Glossary.*Tropopause tropopause}, with the latter being a better indicator of the global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} response in cases when they differ.

Climate change takes place when the system responds in order to counteract the flux changes, and all such responses are explicitly excluded from this definition of forcing. The assumed relation between a sustained RF and the equilibrium global mean {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} response (DT) is DT = lRF where l is the {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} parameter. The relationship between RF and DT is an expression of the {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} of the climate system and a simple reminder that the steadystate global mean {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} to a given forcing is determined both by the forcing and the responses inherent in l.

Implicit in the concept of RF is the proposition that the change in net irradiance in response to the imposed forcing alone can be separated from all subsequent responses to the forcing. These are not in fact always clearly separable and thus some ambiguity exists in what may be considered a forcing versus what is part of the climate response.

In both the Third Assessment Report ({cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR}) and {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, the term {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing} (RF, also called stratospherically adjusted RF, as distinct from instantaneous RF) was defined as the change in net irradiance at the tropopause after allowing for stratospheric temperatures to readjust to radiative equilibrium, while holding surface and tropospheric temperatures and state variables such as water vapour and cloud cover fixed at the unperturbed values8. RF is generally more indicative of the surface and tropospheric temperature responses than instantaneous RF, especially for agents such as carbon dioxide ({Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}) or {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} (O3) change that substantially alter stratospheric temperatures. To be consistent with TAR and AR4, RF is hereafter taken to mean the stratospherically adjusted RF.
