index: hide
name: Gross Anatomy of Bone

The structure of a long bone allows for the best visualization of all of the parts of a bone ({'Figure_6_3_1 Figure 6.3.1}). A long bone has two parts: the  **diaphysis** and the  **epiphysis**. The diaphysis is the tubular shaft that runs between the proximal and distal ends of the bone. The hollow region in the diaphysis is called the  **medullary cavity**, which is filled with yellow marrow. The walls of the diaphysis are composed of dense and hard  **compact bone**.


{image:'Figure_6_3_1}
        

The wider section at each end of the bone is called the epiphysis (plural = epiphyses), which is filled with spongy bone. Red marrow fills the spaces in the spongy bone. Each epiphysis meets the diaphysis at the metaphysis, the narrow area that contains the  **epiphyseal plate** (growth plate), a layer of hyaline (transparent) cartilage in a growing bone. When the bone stops growing in early adulthood (approximately 18–21 years), the cartilage is replaced by osseous tissue and the epiphyseal plate becomes an epiphyseal line.

The medullary cavity has a delicate membranous lining called the  **endosteum** (end- = “inside”; oste- = “bone”), where bone growth, repair, and remodeling occur. The outer surface of the bone is covered with a fibrous membrane called the  **periosteum** (peri *- =* “around” or “surrounding”). The periosteum contains blood vessels, nerves, and lymphatic vessels that nourish compact bone. Tendons and ligaments also attach to bones at the periosteum. The periosteum covers the entire outer surface except where the epiphyses meet other bones to form joints ({'Figure_6_3_2 Figure 6.3.2}). In this region, the epiphyses are covered with  **articular cartilage**, a thin layer of cartilage that reduces friction and acts as a shock absorber.


{image:'Figure_6_3_2}
        

Flat bones, like those of the cranium, consist of a layer of  **diploë** (spongy bone), lined on either side by a layer of compact bone ({'Figure_6_3_3 Figure 6.3.3}). The two layers of compact bone and the interior spongy bone work together to protect the internal organs. If the outer layer of a cranial bone fractures, the brain is still protected by the intact inner layer.


{image:'Figure_6_3_3}
        
