index: hide
name: Agglutination of Bacteria and Viruses

The use of agglutination tests to identify streptococcal bacteria was developed in the 1920s by Rebecca  **Lancefield** working with her colleagues A.R.  **Dochez** and Oswald  **Avery**. She used antibodies to identify  **M protein**, a virulence factor on streptococci that is necessary for the bacteria’s ability to cause strep throat. Production of antibodies against M protein is crucial in mounting a protective response against the bacteria.

Lancefield used antisera to show that different strains of the same species of  **streptococci** express different versions of M protein, which explains why children can come down with  **strep throat** repeatedly. Lancefield classified beta-hemolytic streptococci into many groups based on antigenic differences in group-specific polysaccharides located in the bacterial cell wall. The strains are called  **serovars** because they are differentiated using antisera. Identifying the serovars present in a disease outbreak is important because some serovars may cause more severe disease than others.

The method developed by Lancefield is a  **direct agglutination assay**, since the bacterial cells themselves agglutinate. A similar strategy is more commonly used today when identifying serovars of bacteria and viruses; however, to improve visualization of the agglutination, the antibodies may be attached to inert  **latex beads**. This technique is called an  **indirect agglutination assay** (or  **latex fixation assay**), because the agglutination of the beads is a marker for antibody binding to some other antigen ({'Figure_20_3_Lance Figure 20.3.Lance}). Indirect assays can be used to detect the presence of either antibodies or specific antigens.


{image:'Figure_20_3_Lance}
        

To identify antibodies in a patient’s serum, the antigen of interest is attached to latex beads. When mixed with patient serum, the antibodies will bind the antigen, cross-linking the latex beads and causing the beads to agglutinate indirectly; this indicates the presence of the antibody ({'Figure_20_3_Latex Figure 20.3.Latex}). This technique is most often used when looking for  **IgM** antibodies, because their structure provides maximum cross-linking. One widely used example of this assay is a test for  **rheumatoid factor (RF)** to confirm a diagnosis of rheumatoid arthritis. RF is, in fact, the presence of IgM antibodies that bind to the patient’s own  **IgG**. RF will agglutinate IgG-coated latex beads.

In the reverse test, soluble antigens can be detected in a patient’s serum by attaching specific antibodies (commonly mAbs) to the latex beads and mixing this complex with the serum ({'Figure_20_3_Latex Figure 20.3.Latex}).

Agglutination tests are widely used in underdeveloped countries that may lack appropriate facilities for culturing bacteria. For example, the  **Widal test**, used for the diagnosis of  **typhoid fever**, looks for agglutination of  **Salmonella enterica subspecies typhi** in patient sera. The Widal test is rapid, inexpensive, and useful for monitoring the extent of an outbreak; however, it is not as accurate as tests that involve culturing of the bacteria. The Widal test frequently produces false positives in patients with previous infections with other subspecies of  *Salmonella*, as well as false negatives in patients with hyperproteinemia or immune deficiencies.

In addition, agglutination tests are limited by the fact that patients generally do not produce detectable levels of antibody during the first week (or longer) of an infection. A patient is said to have undergone  **seroconversion** when antibody levels reach the threshold for detection. Typically, seroconversion coincides with the onset of signs and symptoms of disease. However, in an HIV infection, for example, it generally takes 3 weeks for seroconversion to take place, and in some instances, it may take much longer.

Similar to techniques for the precipitin ring test and plaque assays, it is routine to prepare serial two-fold dilutions of the patient’s serum and determine the titer of agglutinating antibody present. Since antibody levels change over time in both primary and secondary immune responses, by checking samples over time, changes in antibody titer can be detected. For example, a comparison of the  **titer** during the  **acute phase** of an infection versus the titer from the  **convalescent phase** will distinguish whether an infection is current or has occurred in the past. It is also possible to monitor how well the patient’s immune system is responding to the pathogen.


{image:'Figure_20_3_Latex}
        

## Hemagglutination

Agglutination of red blood cells is called  **hemagglutination**. One common assay that uses hemagglutination is the  **direct Coombs’ test**, also called the  **direct antihuman globulin test (DAT)**, which generally looks for nonagglutinating antibodies. The test can also detect complement attached to red blood cells.

The Coombs’ test is often employed when a newborn has  **jaundice**, yellowing of the skin caused by high blood concentrations of bilirubin, a product of the breakdown of hemoglobin in the blood. The Coombs’ test is used to determine whether the child’s red blood cells have been bound by the mother’s antibodies. These antibodies would activate complement, leading to red blood cell lysis and the subsequent jaundice. Other conditions that can cause positive direct Coombs’ tests include  **hemolytic transfusion reactions**,  **autoimmune hemolytic anemia**, infectious mononucleosis (caused by  **Epstein-Barr virus**),  **syphilis**, and  **Mycoplasma pneumonia**. A positive direct Coombs’ test may also be seen in some cancers and as an allergic reaction to some drugs (e.g., penicillin).

The antibodies bound to red blood cells in these conditions are most often  **IgG**, and because of the orientation of the antigen-binding sites on IgG and the comparatively large size of a red blood cell, it is unlikely that any visible agglutination will occur. However, the presence of IgG bound to red blood cells can be detected by adding  **Coombs’ reagent**, an antiserum containing antihuman IgG antibodies (that may be combined with anti-complement) ({'Figure_20_3_Coombs Figure 20.3.Coombs}). The Coombs’ reagent links the IgG attached to neighboring red blood cells and thus promotes agglutination.

There is also an  **indirect Coombs’ test** known as the  **indirect antiglobulin test (IAT)**. This screens an individual for antibodies against red blood cell antigens (other than the A and B antigens) that are unbound in a patient’s serum ({'Figure_20_3_Coombs Figure 20.3.Coombs}). IAT can be used to screen pregnant women for antibodies that may cause  **hemolytic disease of the newborn**. It can also be used prior to giving blood transfusions. More detail on how the IAT is performed is discussed below.


{image:'Figure_20_3_Coombs}
        

Antibodies that bind to red blood cells are not the only cause of hemagglutination. Some viruses also bind to red blood cells, and this binding can cause agglutination when the viruses cross-link the red blood cells. For example,  **influenza viruses** have two different types of viral spikes called  **neuraminidase** (N) and  **hemagglutinin** (H), the latter named for its ability to agglutinate red blood cells (see <link:>). Thus, we can use red blood cells to detect the presence of influenza virus by  **direct hemagglutination assays** (HA), in which the virus causes visible agglutination of red blood cells. The  **mumps** and  **rubella** viruses can also be detected using HA.

Most frequently, a  **serial dilution** viral agglutination assay is used to measure the  **titer** or estimate the amount of virus produced in cell culture or for vaccine production. A viral titer can be determined using a direct HA by making a serial dilution of the sample containing the virus, starting with a high concentration of sample that is then diluted in a series of wells. The highest dilution producing visible agglutination is the titer. The assay is carried out in a microtiter plate with V- or round-bottomed wells. In the presence of agglutinating viruses, the red blood cells and virus clump together and produce a diffuse mat over the bottom of the well. In the absence of virus, the red blood cells roll or sediment to the bottom of the well and form a dense pellet, which is why flat-bottomed wells cannot be used ({'Figure_20_3_HA Figure 20.3.HA}).

A modification of the HA assay can be used to determine the titer of antiviral antibodies. The presence of these antibodies in a patient’s serum or in a lab-produced antiserum will neutralize the virus and block it from agglutinating the red cells, making this a  **viral hemagglutination inhibition assay** (HIA). In this assay, patient serum is mixed with a standardized amount of virus. After a short incubation, a standardized amount of red blood cells is added and hemagglutination is observed. The titer of the patient’s serum is the highest dilution that blocks agglutination ({'Figure_20_3_HIA Figure 20.3.HIA}).


{image:'Figure_20_3_HA}
        


{image:'Figure_20_3_HIA}
        
