index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Antibodies can agglutinate cells or large particles into a visible matrix.  **Agglutination** tests are often done on cards or in  **microtiter plates** that allow multiple reactions to take place side by side using small volumes of reagents.
  * Using antisera against certain proteins allows identification of  **serovars** within species of bacteria.
  * Detecting antibodies against a pathogen can be a powerful tool for diagnosing disease, but there is a period of time before patients go through  **seroconversion** and the level of antibodies becomes detectable.
  * Agglutination of latex beads in  **indirect agglutination assays** can be used to detect the presence of specific antigens or specific antibodies in patient serum.
  * The presence of some antibacterial and antiviral antibodies can be confirmed by the use of the direct  **Coombs’ test**, which uses Coombs’ reagent to cross-link antibodies bound to red blood cells and facilitate  **hemagglutination**.
  * Some viruses and bacteria will bind and agglutinate red blood cells; this interaction is the basis of the  **direct hemagglutination assay**, most often used to determine the titer of virus in solution.
  *  **Neutralization assays** quantify the level of virus-specific antibody by measuring the decrease in hemagglutination observed after mixing patient serum with a standardized amount of virus.
  * Hemagglutination assays are also used to screen and  **cross-match** donor and recipient blood to ensure that the transfusion recipient does not have antibodies to antigens in the donated blood.
