index: hide
name: PERFORMING THE HYPOTHESIS TEST

  *  *Null Hypothesis: H0: ρ = 0*
  *  *Alternate Hypothesis: Ha: ρ ≠ 0*

## WHAT THE HYPOTHESES MEAN IN WORDS:

  *  *Null Hypothesis H0:* The population correlation coefficient IS NOT significantly different from zero. There IS NOT a significant linear relationship(correlation) between  *x* and  *y* in the population.
  *  *Alternate Hypothesis Ha:* The population correlation coefficient IS significantly DIFFERENT FROM zero. There IS A SIGNIFICANT LINEAR RELATIONSHIP (correlation) between  *x* and  *y* in the population.

## DRAWING A CONCLUSION:

There are two methods of making the decision. The two methods are equivalent and give the same result.

  *  *Method 1: Using the p-value*
  *  *Method 2: Using a table of critical values*

In this chapter of this textbook, we will always use a significance level of 5%,  *α* = 0.05

## METHOD 1:  Using a  *p*-value to make a decision

  * Decision: Reject the null hypothesis.
  * Conclusion: "There is sufficient evidence to conclude that there is a significant linear relationship between  *x* and  *y* because the correlation coefficient is significantly different from zero."

  * Decision: DO NOT REJECT the null hypothesis.
  * Conclusion: "There is insufficient evidence to conclude that there is a significant linear relationship  between  *x* and  *y* because the correlation coefficient is NOT significantly different from zero."

  * You will use technology to calculate the  *p*-value. The following describes the calculations to compute the test statistics and the  *p*-value:
  * The  *p*-value is calculated using a  *t*-distribution with  *n* - 2 degrees of freedom.
  *   The formula for the test statistic is <math xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:cnxorg="http://cnx.rice.edu/system-info" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"> <mrow>  <mi>t</mi><mo>=</mo><mfrac>   <mrow>    <mi>r</mi><msqrt>     <mrow>      <mi>n</mi><mo>−</mo><mn>2</mn>     </mrow>    </msqrt>   </mrow>   <mrow>    <msqrt>     <mrow>      <mn>1</mn><mo>−</mo><msup>       <mi>r</mi>       <mn>2</mn>      </msup>     </mrow>    </msqrt>   </mrow>  </mfrac> </mrow></math>. The value of the test statistic,  *t*, is shown in the computer or calculator output along with the  *p*-value. The test statistic  *t*  has the same sign as the correlation coefficient  *r*.
  * The  *p*-value is the combined area in both tails.

An alternative way to calculate the  *p*-value  *(p)* given by LinRegTTest is the command 2*tcdf(abs(t),10^99, n-2) in 2nd DISTR.

  * Consider the .
  * The line of best fit is: ŷ = -173.51 + 4.83 *x* with  *r* = 0.6631 and there are  *n* = 11 data points.
  * Can the regression line be used for prediction?  *Given a third exam score (x value), can we use the line to predict the final exam score (predicted y value)?*

 *H0*:  *ρ* = 0

 *Ha*:  *ρ* ≠ 0

 *α* = 0.05

  * The  *p*-value is 0.026 (from LinRegTTest on your calculator or from computer software).
  * The  *p*-value, 0.026, is less than the significance level of  *α* = 0.05.
  * Decision: Reject the Null Hypothesis  *H0*
  * Conclusion: There is sufficient evidence to conclude that there is a significant linear relationship between the third exam score ( *x*) and the final exam score ( *y*) because the correlation coefficient is significantly different from zero.

 *Because r is significant and the scatter plot shows a linear trend, the regression line can be used to predict final exam scores.*

## METHOD 2: Using a table of Critical Values to make a decision

The  can be used to give you a good idea of whether the computed value of  *r is significant or not*. Compare  *r* to the appropriate critical value in the table. If  *r* is not between the positive and negative critical values, then the correlation coefficient is significant. If  *r* is significant, then you may want to use the line for prediction.
