index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 6.4.7.1
title: 6.4.7.1 - Future Methane Emissions from Wetlands

Overall, there is medium confidence that {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} from wetlands are likely to increase in the future under elevated {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} and warmer climate. Wetland extent is determined by geomorphology and {Glossary.*Soil_moisture soil moisture}, which depends on precipitation, {Glossary.*Evapotranspiration evapotranspiration}, drainage and {Glossary.*Runoff runoff}. All of these may change in the future. Increasing temperature can lead to higher rates of evapotranspiration, reducing soil moisture and therefore affect wetland extent, and temporary increasing aeration of existing wetlands with further consequences to methane emissions. Regional {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of precipitation changes are especially uncertain (see {Chapters.12 Chapter 12}).

Direct effects on wetland CH4 emissions include: higher NPP under higher temperature and higher atmospheric CO2 concentrations leading to more substrate for methanogenesis ({cite.6.'White_et_al_2008}); higher CH4 production rates under higher temperature; and changes in CH4 oxidation through changed precipitation that alters water table position ({cite.6.'Melton_et_al_2013}). Wetland CH4 emissions are also affected by changes in wetland area which may either increase (due to thawing {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost} or reduced evapotranspiration) or decrease (due to reduced precipitation or increased evaporation) regionally. In most models, elevated CO2 has a stronger enhancement effect on CH4 emissions than climate change. However, large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} exist concerning the lack of wetland specific plant functional types in most models and the lack of understanding how wetland plants will react to CO2 fertilisation (e.g., {cite.6.'Berendse_et_al_2001}; {cite.6.'Boardman_et_al_2011}; {cite.6.'Heijmans_et_al_2001}, 2002a, 2002b).

Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, several modelling studies have attempted to quantify the sensitivity of global wetland CH4 emissions to environmental changes (see {'Figure_6_37 Figure 6.37}). The studies cover a wide range of simulation results but there is high agreement between model results that the combined effect of CO2 increase and climate change by the end of the 21st century will increase wetland CH4 emissions. Using a common experimental protocol with spatially uniform changes in precipitation, temperature and CO2 (“WETCHIMP”; {cite.6.'Melton_et_al_2013}) seven models predict that the effect of increased temperature alone (red bars in {'Figure_6_37 Figure 6.37}) may cause an increase or decrease of wetland CH4 emissions, while the effect of increased precipitation alone (green bars in {'Figure_6_37 Figure 6.37}) is always an increase, although generally small. The effect of increased atmospheric CO2 concentration (fertilisation of NPP; {Box_6_3 Box 6.3}; blue bars in {'Figure_6_37 Figure 6.37}) always resulted in an increase of emissions (22 to 162%). Other studies assessed the effects of temperature and precipitation together (orange bars in {'Figure_6_37 Figure 6.37}) and often found an increase in wetland CH4 emissions ({cite.6.'Eliseev_et_al_2008}; {cite.6.'Gedney_et_al_2004}; {cite.6.'Shindell_et_al_2004}; {cite.6.'Volodin_2008}) although {cite.6.'Ringeval_et_al_2011 Ringeval et al. (2011)} found a net decrease. The combined effect of climate and CO2 resulted in an increase of wetland CH4 emissions from 40% ({cite.6.'Volodin_2008 Volodin (2008)}; fixed wetland area) to 68% ({cite.6.'Ringeval_et_al_2011}); variable wetland area).

{image:'Figure_6_37}

The models assessed here do not consider changes in soil hydrological properties caused by changes in organic matter content. Positive feedbacks from increased drainage due to organic carbon loss may accelerate peat decomposition rates ({cite.6.'Ise_et_al_2008}). However, carbon {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} due to elevated NPP in wetland and permafrost regions may to some extent offset CH4 emissions ({cite.6.'Frolking_and_Roulet_2007}; {cite.6.'Turetsky_et_al_2007}). None of the studies or models assessed here considers CH4 emissions from mangroves.

The models also do not agree in their simulations of present day wetland extent or CH4 emissions, and there are not adequate data sets to evaluate them thoroughly at the grid scale (typically 0.5°) ({cite.6.'Melton_et_al_2013}). Hence despite high agreement between models of a strong positive response of wetland CH4 emission rates to increasing atmospheric CO2 we assign low confidence to quantitative projections of future wetland CH4 emissions.

Soil CH4 oxidation of about 30 Tg(CH4) yr–1 ({'Table_6_8 Table 6.8}) represents the smallest of the three sinks for atmospheric methane (see {'Table_6_8 Table 6.8}) but is also sensitive to future environmental changes. Soil CH4 oxidation is projected to increase by up to 23% under the SRES A1B due to rising atmospheric CH4 concentrations, higher {Glossary.*Soil_temperature soil temperature} and lower soil moisture ({cite.6.'Curry_2007}, 2009).
