index: hide
name: Life Cycle of Viruses with Animal Hosts

 **Lytic animal viruses** follow similar infection stages to bacteriophages: attachment, penetration, biosynthesis, maturation, and release (see {'Figure_6_2_RepAnVirus Figure 6.2.RepAnVirus}). However, the mechanisms of penetration, nucleic-acid biosynthesis, and release differ between bacterial and animal viruses. After binding to host receptors, animal viruses enter through  **endocytosis** (engulfment by the host cell) or through  **membrane fusion** (viral envelope with the host cell membrane). Many viruses are host specific, meaning they only infect a certain type of host; and most viruses only infect certain types of cells within tissues. This specificity is called a  **tissue tropism**. Examples of this are demonstrated by the  **poliovirus**, which exhibits tropism for the tissues of the brain and spinal cord, or the  **influenza virus**, which has a primary tropism for the respiratory tract.


{image:'Figure_6_2_RepAnVirus}
        

Animal viruses do not always express their genes using the normal flow of genetic information—from DNA to RNA to protein. Some viruses have a  **dsDNA** genome like cellular organisms and can follow the normal flow. However, others may have  **ssDNA**,  **dsRNA**, or  **ssRNA** genomes. The nature of the genome determines how the genome is replicated and expressed as viral proteins. If a genome is ssDNA, host enzymes will be used to synthesize a second strand that is complementary to the genome strand, thus producing dsDNA. The dsDNA can now be replicated, transcribed, and translated similar to host DNA.

If the viral genome is RNA, a different mechanism must be used. There are three types of RNA genome: dsRNA,  **positive (+) single-strand (+ssRNA)** or  **negative (−) single-strand RNA (−ssRNA)**. If a virus has a +ssRNA genome, it can be translated directly to make viral proteins. Viral genomic +ssRNA acts like cellular mRNA. However, if a virus contains a −ssRNA genome, the host ribosomes cannot translate it until the −ssRNA is replicated into +ssRNA by viral  **RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRP)** (see {'Figure_6_2_RNAvirus Figure 6.2.RNAvirus}). The RdRP is brought in by the virus and can be used to make +ssRNA from the original −ssRNA genome. The RdRP is also an important enzyme for the replication of dsRNA viruses, because it uses the negative strand of the double-stranded genome as a template to create +ssRNA. The newly synthesized +ssRNA copies can then be translated by cellular ribosomes.


{image:'Figure_6_2_RNAvirus}
        

An alternative mechanism for viral nucleic acid synthesis is observed in the  **retrovirus** **es**, which are +ssRNA viruses (see {'Figure_6_2_hiv Figure 6.2.hiv}). Single-stranded RNA viruses such as HIV carry a special enzyme called  **reverse transcriptase** within the capsid that synthesizes a complementary ssDNA (cDNA) copy using the +ssRNA genome as a template. The ssDNA is then made into dsDNA, which can integrate into the host chromosome and become a permanent part of the host. The integrated viral genome is called a  **provirus**. The virus now can remain in the host for a long time to establish a chronic infection. The provirus stage is similar to the prophage stage in a bacterial infection during the lysogenic cycle. However, unlike prophage, the provirus does not undergo excision after splicing into the genome.


{image:'Figure_6_2_hiv}
        
