index: hide
name: Primary Lymphoid Organs and Lymphocyte Development

Understanding the differentiation and development of B and T cells is critical to the understanding of the adaptive immune response. It is through this process that the body (ideally) learns to destroy only pathogens and leaves the body’s own cells relatively intact. The  **primary lymphoid organs** are the bone marrow and thymus gland. The lymphoid organs are where lymphocytes mature, proliferate, and are selected, which enables them to attack pathogens without harming the cells of the body.

## Bone Marrow

In the embryo, blood cells are made in the yolk sac. As development proceeds, this function is taken over by the spleen, lymph nodes, and liver. Later, the bone marrow takes over most hematopoietic functions, although the final stages of the differentiation of some cells may take place in other organs. The red  **bone marrow** is a loose collection of cells where hematopoiesis occurs, and the yellow bone marrow is a site of energy storage, which consists largely of fat cells ({'Figure_22_1_5 Figure 22.1.5}). The B cell undergoes nearly all of its development in the red bone marrow, whereas the immature T cell, called a  **thymocyte**, leaves the bone marrow and matures largely in the thymus gland.


{image:'Figure_22_1_5}
        

## Thymus

The  **thymus** gland is a bilobed organ found in the space between the sternum and the aorta of the heart ({'Figure_22_1_6 Figure 22.1.6}). Connective tissue holds the lobes closely together but also separates them and forms a capsule.


{image:'Figure_22_1_6}
        

The connective tissue capsule further divides the thymus into lobules via extensions called trabeculae. The outer region of the organ is known as the cortex and contains large numbers of thymocytes with some epithelial cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells (two types of phagocytic cells that are derived from monocytes). The cortex is densely packed so it stains more intensely than the rest of the thymus (see {'Figure_22_1_6 Figure 22.1.6}). The medulla, where thymocytes migrate before leaving the thymus, contains a less dense collection of thymocytes, epithelial cells, and dendritic cells.
