index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.4.4.2
title: 13.4.4.2 - Dynamical Change

The Antarctic {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} represents the largest potential {Glossary.*Source source} of future SLR; the West Antarctic ice sheet alone has the potential to raise {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} by ~4.3 m ({cite.13.'Fretwell_et_al_2013}). The rate at which this {Glossary.*Reservoir reservoir} will be depleted and cause sea level to rise, however, is not easily quantifiable. In this section, we focus on dynamical changes (i.e., those related to the flow of the ice sheet) that affect SLR by altering the flux of ice across the {Glossary.*Grounding_line grounding line} (or outflow) that separates ice resting on bedrock (some of which does not currently displace ocean water) from floating ice shelves (which already displace ocean water and have only a negligible effect on sea level) ({cite.13.'Jenkins_and_Holland_2007}).

Issues associated with the inability of models to reproduce recently observed changes in the dynamics of the Antarctic ice sheet prevented the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} from quantifying the effect of these changes on future sea level. Since the AR4, progress has been made in understanding the observations (Sections {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_3 4.4.3} and {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_4 4.4.4}), and {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} are becoming available. It must be stressed, however, that this field has yet to reach the same level of development that exists for modelling many other components of the {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system}. There is an underlying concern that observations presage the onset of large-scale grounding line retreat in what is termed the Marine Ice Sheet Instability (MISI; {Box_13_2 Box 13.2}), and much of the research assessed here attempts to understand the applicability of this theoretical concept to projected SLR from Antarctica.

There are three distinct processes that could link climate change to dynamical change of the Antarctic ice sheet and potentially trigger increased outflow. These may operate directly through the increased potential for melt ponds to form on the upper surface of ice shelves, which may destabilize them, or by increases in submarine melt experienced by ice shelves as a consequence of oceanic warming, which leads to their thinning, as well as indirectly by coupling between SMB and ice flow. Section 4.4.3.2 presents the observational basis on which understanding of these processes is based, while their potential future importance is assessed here. Literature on the two mechanisms directly linked to climate change will be assessed first, followed by their relation to outflow change and lastly SMB coupling.

There is strong evidence that regional warming and increased melt water ponding in the Antarctic Peninsula led to the collapse of ice shelves along the length of peninsula ({cite.13.'Cook_and_Vaughan_2010}), most notably the Larsen B {Glossary.*Ice_shelf ice shelf} ({cite.13.'MacAyeal_et_al_2003}). Substantial local warming (~5 to 7 °C) would, however, be required before the main Antarctic ice shelves (the Ross and Filchner-Ronne ice shelves) would become threatened ({cite.13.'Joughin_and_Alley_2011}). An assessment of the AR4 AOGCM {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} under scenario A1B yielded an Antarctic continental-average warming rate of 0.034 ± 0.01°C yr–1 ({cite.13.'Bracegirdle_et_al_2008}), suggesting that the required level of warming may not be approached by the end of the 21st century. Using an intermediate complexity model with scenario A2, {cite.13.'Fyke_et_al_2010 Fyke et al. (2010)} found that melt starts to reach significant levels over these ice shelves around 2100 to 2300. {cite.13.'Barrand_et_al_2013 Barrand et al. (2013)} made a process-based assessment of the effect of ice-shelf collapse on outflow from the Antarctic Peninsula, which yields a range of SLR at 2100 between 10 and 20 mm, with a bounding maximum of 40 mm.

There is good evidence linking the focus of current Antarctic mass loss in the Amundsen Sea sector of the WAIS (containing Pine Island and Thwaites Glaciers) ({cite.13.'Shepherd_and_Wingham_2007}; {cite.13.'Rignot_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Pritchard_et_al_2009}) to the presence of relatively warm Circumpolar Deep Water on the continental shelf ({cite.13.'Thoma_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Jenkins_et_al_2010}). However, it is not possible to determine whether this upwelling was related directly or indirectly to a rise in {Topics.*Surface_Temperature global mean temperature}. {cite.13.'Yin_et_al_2011 Yin et al. (2011)} assessed output from 19 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} under scenario A1B to determine how subsurface temperatures are projected to evolve around the West and East Antarctic ice sheets. They showed decadal-mean warming of 0.4°C to 0.7°C and 0.4°C to 0.9°C around West and East Antarctica, respectively (25th to 75th {Glossary.*Percentiles percentiles} of ensemble) by the end of the 21st century. More detailed regional modelling using scenario A1B illustrates the potential for warm water to invade the ocean cavity underlying the Filchner-Ronne ice shelf in the second half of the 21st century, with an associated 20-fold increase in melt ({cite.13.'Hellmer_et_al_2012}). Based on the limited literature, there is medium confidence that oceanic processes may potentially trigger further dynamical change particularly in the latter part of the 21st century, while there is also medium confidence that atmospheric change will not affect dynamics outside of the Antarctic Peninsula during the 21st century.

Several process-based projections of the future evolution of Pine Island {Glossary.*Glacier Glacier} have now been made, and some of the issues that this modelling faced (such as the need for sub-kilometre {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} to ensure consistent results; {cite.13.'Cornford_et_al_2013 Cornford et al. (2013)}, {cite.13.'Durand_et_al_2009 Durand et al. (2009)}) are being resolved ({cite.13.'Pattyn_et_al_2013}). In experiments using an idealized increase in marine melt, {cite.13.'Joughin_et_al_2010 Joughin et al. (2010)} demonstrated only limited (~25 km) retreat of the grounding line before a new equilibrium position was established. {cite.13.'Gladstone_et_al_2012 Gladstone et al. (2012)} used a flowline model forced with ocean-model output ({cite.13.'Hellmer_et_al_2012}) to identify two modes of retreat: one similar to that identified by {cite.13.'Joughin_et_al_2010 Joughin et al. (2010)}, and a second characterized by complete collapse from 2150 onwards. More sophisticated ice-flow modelling (albeit with idealized {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}) suggests grounding line retreat of ~100 km in 50 years ({cite.13.'Cornford_et_al_2013}). These studies support the theoretical finding of {cite.13.'Gudmundsson_et_al_2012 Gudmundsson et al. (2012)} that grounding line retreat, if triggered, does not inevitably lead to MISI but may halt if local buttressing from ice rises or channel sidewalls is sufficient. {cite.13.'Parizek_et_al_2013 Parizek et al. (2013)} used a flowline model to study Thwaites Glacier and found that grounding line retreat is possible only under extreme ocean forcing. It is also thought that considerably less back pressure is exerted by Thwaites’ ice shelf in comparison to Pine Island’s ({cite.13.'Rignot_2001}; 2008), which may make it less sensitive to forcing by submarine melt ({cite.13.'Schoof_2007a}; {cite.13.'Goldberg_et_al_2012}). Based on this literature, there is high confidence that the retreat of Pine Island Glacier (if it occurs) can be characterized by a SLR measured in centimetres by 2100, although there is low confidence in the models’ ability to determine the probability or timing of any such retreat. There is also medium confidence (in the light of the limited literature) that Thwaites Glacier is probably less prone to undergo ocean-driven grounding line retreat than its neighbour in the 21st century. No process-based modelling is available on which to be base projections of EAIS glaciers currently losing mass, such as Totten and Cook Glaciers.

{cite.13.'Bindschadler_et_al_2013 Bindschadler et al. (2013)} reported a model inter-comparison exercise on the impact of climate change under {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} on the Antarctic ice sheet. The resultant {Glossary.*Projection projection} includes contributions from increased marine melt in the Amundsen Sea and Amery sectors, and generated a mean SLR at 2100 of ~100 mm over four models (with overall SLR of 81 mm when SMB change was included). There is, however, low confidence in the projection because of the unproven ability of many of the contributing models to simulate grounding line motion. {cite.13.'Bindschadler_et_al_2013 Bindschadler et al. (2013)} also reported idealized experiments in which ice-shelf melt is increased by 2, 20 and 200 m yr–1. The resulting fivemodel mean SLR of 69, 693 and 3477 mm by 2100, respectively, can be considered only as a general indication because of the shortcomings of the contributing models (e.g., two do not include ice shelves) which may be offset by the use of a multi-model mean. Although grounding line migration in the 20 m yr–1 experiment is extensive in some models and consistent with what might be expected under MISI ({cite.13.'Bindschadler_et_al_2013}), the 200 m yr–1 experiment is unrealistic, even if used as a {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} for the improbable {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}-driven collapse of the major ice shelves, and is not considered further.

We now assess two alternatives to process-based modelling that exist in the literature: the development of plausible high-end projections based on physical intuition ({cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011}) and the use of a probabilistic framework for extrapolating current observations of the ice sheet’s mass budget ({cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013a}; 2013b). {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)} postulated a possible but extreme scenario of 615 mm SLR based on vastly accelerated outflow in the Amundsen Sea sector and East Antarctica, whereas a more plausible scenario involving reduced acceleration in the Amundsen Sea sector yields 136 mm. {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011 Katsman et al. (2011)} used similar assumptions in a ‘modest’ scenario that generates SLR of 70 to 150 mm, and a ‘severe’ scenario that attempts to capture the consequences of the collapse of the WAIS through the MISI and has a SLR contribution of 490 mm. The NRC (2012) extrapolated mass-budget observations of the ice sheet to generate a projection of 157 to 323 mm (including future SMB change), with an additional 77 to 462 mm accounting for 21st-century increases in outflow (summing as 234 to 785 mm).

{cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013a Little et al. (2013a)} applied a range of linear growth rates to present-day SMB and outflow observations of Antarctic sectors ({cite.13.'Rignot_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Shuman_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Zwally_and_Giovinetto_2011}), which are then weighted using a continental-scale observational synthesis ({cite.13.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}) (consistent with the assessment of {Chapters.4 Chapter 4}). In the case of Pine Island Glacier, growth rates are based on the process-based modelling of {cite.13.'Joughin_et_al_2010 Joughin et al. (2010)}. Within this framework, SLR at 2100 has a 5 to 95% range of –20 to 185 mm for dynamical change only, and –86 to 133 mm when SMB change is included (based on {cite.13.'Uotila_et_al_2007 Uotila et al. (2007)}). Projections for the Antarctic Peninsula are consistent with the process-based modelling of {cite.13.'Barrand_et_al_2013 Barrand et al. (2013)}. Further, {cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013a Little et al. (2013a)} found that the upper (95%) limit of the projected range can only approach 400 mm under {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} expected for MISI (such as the immediate collapse of Pine Island and Thwaites Glaciers or all marine-based sectors experiencing the same rates of mass loss as Pine Island Glacier).

Our assessment of the likely range of SLR is based on the weighted 5-95% range (-20 to 185 mm) of Little et al. (2013), which is consistent with the lower scenarios of {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011 Katsman et al. (2011)} (70 to 150 mm) and {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)} (136 mm), and with the RCP8.5 projection and low-melt experiment of {cite.13.'Bindschadler_et_al_2013 Bindschadler et al. (2013)} (~100 and 69 mm, respectively). The base projection of the NRC (2012) (157 to 323 mm including future SMB change), however, is less compatible. This moderate level of consistency across a range of techniques suggests medium confidence in this assessment. We assess this as the likely (as opposed to very likely) range because it is based primarily on perturbations of the ice sheet’s present-day state of mass imbalance and does not include the potentially large increases in outflow that may be associated with the MISI discussed below.

The probability of extensive grounding line retreat being both triggered and continuing to the extent that it contributes to significant SLR in the 21st century is very poorly constrained, as the results of a recent expert elicitation indicate ({cite.13.'Bamber_and_Aspinall_2013}). We have medium confidence, however, that this probability lies outside of the likely range of SLR. Five arguments support this assessment. First, the partial loss of Pine Island Glacier is included by {cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013a Little et al. (2013a)} in their range and the full loss of the {Glossary.*Ice_stream ice stream} (if it were to occur) is thought to raise sea level by centimetres only (consistent with the use of the {cite.13.'Little_et_al_2013a Little et al. (2013a)} 5 to 95% range as the assessed likely range). Second, the current grounding line position of the neighbouring Thwaites Glacier appears to be more stable than that of Pine Island Glacier ({cite.13.'Parizek_et_al_2013}) so that its potentially large contribution to SLR by 2100 is assessed to have a significantly lower probability. Third, there is a low probability that atmospheric warming in the 21st century will lead to extensive grounding line retreat outside of the Antarctic Peninsula because summer air temperatures will not rise to the level where significant surface melt and ponding occur. Fourth, although this retreat may be triggered by oceanic warming during the 21st century (in particular, under the Filchner-Ronne ice shelf), current literature suggests that this may occur late in the century ({cite.13.'Hellmer_et_al_2012}), reducing the time over which enhanced outflow could affect end-of-century SLR. Finally, there are theoretical grounds to believe that grounding line retreat may stabilize ({cite.13.'Gudmundsson_et_al_2012}) so that MISI (and associated high SLR) is not inevitable.

We next assess the magnitude of potential SLR at 2100 in the event that MISI affects the Antarctic ice sheet. {cite.13.'Bindschadler_et_al_2013 Bindschadler et al. (2013)}, {cite.13.'Katsman_et_al_2011 Katsman et al. (2011)}, the NRC (2012), and {cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008 Pfeffer et al. (2008)} presented contrasting approaches that can be used to make this assessment, which are upper-end estimates of 693, 490, 785 and 615 mm, respectively. Together this literature suggests with medium confidence that this contribution would be several tenths of a metre. The literature does not offer a means of assessing the probability of this contribution, however, other than our assessment (above) that it lies above the likely range.

Literature investigating the relation between the SLR generated by dynamical change and {Topics.*Emissions emission} scenario does not currently exist. There is also a lack of literature on the relation between {Glossary.*Emission_scenario emission scenario} and the intrusions of warm water into ice-shelf cavities thought to be important in triggering observed mass loss ({cite.13.'Jacobs_et_al_2011}) and potentially important in the future ({cite.13.'Hellmer_et_al_2012}). It is therefore premature to attach a scenario dependence to projections of dynamical change, even though such a dependency is expected to exist.

Likely increases in snowfall over the next century ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_1 Section 13.4.4.1}) will affect the amount of ice lost by outflow across the grounding line because of local changes in ice thickness and stress regime (Huybrechts and De Wolde, 1999). This effect was incorporated in AR4 projections for 2100 as a compensatory mass loss amounting to 0 to 10% of the SMB mass gain ({cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006}). {cite.13.'Winkelmann_et_al_2012 Winkelmann et al. (2012)} re-evaluated the effect and reported a range of 15 to 35% for the next century (30 to 65% after 500 years). The two studies are difficult to compare because of differences in model physics and experimental design so that the use of their joint range (0 to 35%) is an appropriate assessment of the likely range of this effect. This range is supported by {cite.13.'Barrand_et_al_2013 Barrand et al. (2013)}, who quantified the effect for the Antarctic Peninsula as ~15% of SMB. Moreover, because this contribution relies on similar physics to the grounding line migration discussed above, it is appropriate to assume that their {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} are correlated. {cite.13.'Winkelmann_et_al_2012 Winkelmann et al. (2012)} showed that the fractional size of this compensatory effect is independent of scenario. Accounting for this effect equates to SLR of 0 to 32 mm by 2100 based on the SMB range over all emission-scenario projections in Section 13.5.1.1.

Beyond the 21st century, only projections with coarse-resolution ice sheet–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} are available (Vizcaíno et al., 2010; {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011}). Confidence in the ability of these two models to capture both change in the oceanic circulation around Antarctica and the response of the ice sheet to these changes, especially a potential grounding line retreat, is low. The model applied by Vizcaíno et al. (2010) lacks a dynamic representation of ice shelves. Because dynamic ice discharge from Antarctica occurs predominately through ice shelves, it is likely that the projections using this model considerably underestimate the Antarctic contribution.

In summary, it is likely that dynamical change within the Antarctic ice sheet will lead to SLR during the next century with a range of –20 to 185 mm. SLR beyond the likely range is poorly constrained and considerably larger increases are possible (the underlying probability distribution is asymmetric towards larger rise), which will probably be associated with the MISI ({Box_13_2 Box 13.2}). Although the {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} of such SLR cannot yet be assessed more precisely than falling above the likely range, literature suggests (with medium confidence) that its potential magnitude is several tenths of a metre. We are unable to assess SLR as a function of emission scenario, although a dependency of SLR on scenario is expected to exist. In addition, coupling between SMB and dynamical change is likely to make a further contribution to SLR of 0 to 35% of the SMB. All the available literature suggests that this dynamical contribution to sea level rise will continue well beyond 2100.
