index: hide
name: Animal Characterization Based on Body Symmetry

At a very basic level of classification, true animals can be largely divided into three groups based on the type of symmetry of their body plan: radially symmetrical, bilaterally symmetrical, and asymmetrical. Asymmetry is seen in two modern clades, the Parazoa ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **a**) and Placozoa. (Although we should note that the ancestral fossils of the Parazoa apparently exhibited bilateral symmetry.) One clade, the Cnidaria ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **b,c**), exhibits radial or biradial symmetry: Ctenophores have rotational symmetry ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **e**). Bilateral symmetry is seen in the largest of the clades, the Bilateria ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **d**); however the Echinodermata are bilateral as larvae and metamorphose secondarily into radial adults. All types of symmetry are well suited to meet the unique demands of a particular animal’s lifestyle.

 **Radial symmetry** is the arrangement of body parts around a central axis, as is seen in a bicycle wheel or pie. It results in animals having top and bottom surfaces but no left and right sides, nor front or back. If a radially symmetrical animal is divided in any direction along the oral/aboral axis (the side with a mouth is “oral side,” and the side without a mouth is the “aboral side”), the two halves will be mirror images. This form of symmetry marks the body plans of many animals in the phyla Cnidaria, including jellyfish and adult sea anemones ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **b, c**). Radial symmetry equips these sea creatures (which may be sedentary or only capable of slow movement or floating) to experience the environment equally from all directions. Bilaterally symmetrical animals, like butterflies ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **d**) have only a single plane along which the body can be divided into equivalent halves. The Ctenophora ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **e**), although they look similar to jellyfish, are considered to have rotational symmetry rather than radial or biradial symmetry because division of the body into two halves along the oral/aboral axis divides them into two copies of the same half, with one copy rotated 180<sup>o</sup>, rather than two mirror images.


{image:'Figure_B27_2_2abcd}
        

 **Bilateral symmetry** involves the division of the animal through a midsagittal plane, resulting in two superficially mirror images, right and left halves, such as those of a butterfly ({'Figure_B27_2_2abcd Figure B27.2.2abcd} **d**), crab, or human body. Animals with bilateral symmetry have a “head” and “tail” (anterior vs. posterior), front and back (dorsal vs. ventral), and right and left sides ({'Figure_27_2_3 Figure 27.2.3}). All Eumetazoa except those with secondary radial symmetry are bilaterally symmetrical. The evolution of bilateral symmetry that allowed for the formation of anterior and posterior (head and tail) ends promoted a phenomenon called cephalization, which refers to the collection of an organized nervous system at the animal’s anterior end. In contrast to radial symmetry, which is best suited for stationary or limited-motion lifestyles, bilateral symmetry allows for streamlined and directional motion. In evolutionary terms, this simple form of symmetry promoted active and controlled directional mobility and increased sophistication of resource-seeking and predator-prey relationships.


{image:'Figure_27_2_3}
        

Animals in the phylum Echinodermata (such as sea stars, sand dollars, and sea urchins) display modified radial symmetry as adults, but as we have noted, their larval stages (such as the bipinnaria) initially exhibit bilateral symmetry until they metamorphose in animals with radial symmetry (this is termed secondary radial symmetry). Echinoderms evolved from bilaterally symmetrical animals; thus, they are classified as bilaterally symmetrical.
