index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.5.4.2
title: 12.5.4.2 - Constraints on Cumulative Carbon Emissions

The current RF from {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} maintained indefinitely (i.e., the commitment from constant greenhouse gas concentrations) would correspond to approximately 2°C warming. That, however, does not imply that the commitment from past {Topics.*Emissions emissions} has already exceeded 2°C. Part of the positive RF from GHGs is currently compensated by negative {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing, and stopping GHG emissions would lead to a decrease in the GHG forcing. Actively removing {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} from the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}, for example by the combined use of {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} energy and carbon capture and storage, would further accelerate the decrease in GHG forcing.

The total amount of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} CO2 released in the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} (often termed cumulative carbon emission) is a good indicator of the atmospheric CO2 concentration and hence of the global warming response to CO2. The ratio of global temperature change to total cumulative anthropogenic CO2 emissions ({Glossary.*Transient_climate_response_to_cumulative_CO2_emissions TCRE}) is relatively constant over time and independent of the scenario, but is model dependent as it depends on the model cumulative {Glossary.*Airborne_fraction airborne fraction} of CO2 and ECS/ TCR ({cite.12.'Matthews_and_Caldeira_2008}; {cite.12.'Allen_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Gregory_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Matthews_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Bowerman_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Knutti_and_Plattner_2012}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2012}, 2013). This is consistent with an earlier study indicating that the {Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential global warming potential} of CO2 is approximately independent of the scenario ({cite.12.'Caldeira_and_Kasting_1993}). The concept of a constant ratio of cumulative emissions of CO2 to temperature holds well only until temperatures peak (see {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}e) and only for smoothly varying cumulative CO2 emissions ({cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2013}). It does not hold for stabilization on millennial time scales or for non-CO2 {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}, and there is limited evidence for its applicability for cumulative emissions exceeding 2000 PgC owing to limited simulations available ({cite.12.'Plattner_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Hajima_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Matsuno_et_al_2012b}; {cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2013}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2013}). For non-CO2 forcings with shorter atmospheric life times than CO2 the rate of emissions at the time of peak warming is more important than the cumulative emissions over time ({cite.12.'Smith_et_al_2012}).

{image:'Figure_12_45}

Assuming constant {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} and fixed {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} feedbacks, long-term (several centuries to millennium) stabilization of global temperatures requires eventually the stabilization of atmospheric concentrations (or decreasing concentrations if the temperature should be stabilized more quickly). This requires decreasing emissions to near-zero ({cite.12.'Jones_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}; {cite.12.'Weaver_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Matthews_and_Caldeira_2008}; {cite.12.'Plattner_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Allen_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Matthews_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Friedlingstein_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Roeckner_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Knutti_and_Plattner_2012}; {cite.12.'Matsuno_et_al_2012a}).

The relationships between cumulative emissions and temperature for various studies are shown in {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}. Note that some lines mark the evolution of temperature as a function of emissions over time while other panels show peak temperatures for different simulations.

Also some models prescribe only CO2 emissions while others use multi gas {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}, and the time horizons differ. The warming is usually larger if non-CO2 forcings are considered, since the net effect of the non-CO2 forcings is positive in most scenarios ({cite.12.'Hajima_et_al_2012}). Not all numbers are therefore directly comparable. {cite.12.'Matthews_et_al_2009 Matthews et al. (2009)} estimated the TCRE as 1°C to 2.1°C per 1000 PgC (TtC, or 1012 {Glossary.*Metric metric} tonnes of carbon) (5 to 95%) based on the C4MIP model range ({'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}a). The ENSEMBLES E1 show a range of 1°C to 4°C per 1000 PgC (scaled from 0.5°C to 2°C for 500 PgC, {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}d) ({cite.12.'Johns_et_al_2011}). {cite.12.'Rogelj_et_al_2012 Rogelj et al. (2012)} estimate a 5 to 95% range of about 1°C to 2°C per 1000 PgC ({'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}e) based on the MAGICC model calibrated to the C4MIP model range and the likely range of 2°C to 4.5°C for climate sensitivity given in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}. {cite.12.'Allen_et_al_2009 Allen et al. (2009)} used a simple model and found 1.3°C to 3.9°C per 1000 PgC (5 to 95%) for peak warming ({'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}g) and 1.4°C to 2.5°C for TCRE. The {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs} TCRE simulations suggest a range of about 1.4°C to 2.5°C per 1000 PgC and a mean of 1.9°C per 1000 PgC ({cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2013}) ({'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}h). The results of {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009 Meinshausen et al. (2009)} confirm the approximate linearity between temperature and CO2 emissions ({'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}b). Their results are difficult to compare owing to the shorter time period considered, but the model was found to be consistent with that of {cite.12.'Allen_et_al_2009 Allen et al. (2009)}. {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2009 Zickfeld et al. (2009)}, using an EMIC, find a best estimate of about 1.5°C per 1000 PgC. {cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2013 Gillett et al. (2013)} find a range of 0.8°C to 2.4°C per 1000 PgC in 15 CMIP5 models and derive an observationally constrained range of 0.7°C to 2.0°C per 1000 PgC. Results from much earlier model studies support the near linear relationship of cumulative emissions and global temperature, even though these studies did not discuss the linear relationship. An example is given in {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}c based on data shown in IPCC {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} {'Figure_13_3 Figure 13.3} ({cite.12.'IPCC_2001}) and IPCC AR4 Figure 10.35 ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}). The relationships between cumulative CO2 emissions and temperature in CMIP5 are shown in {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}f for the 1% yr–1 CO2 increase scenarios and in {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}i for the {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} emission driven ESM simulations ({cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2013}). {Glossary.*Compatible_emissions Compatible emissions} from concentration driven CMIP5 {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} are discussed in {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_3.6_4_3_3 Section 6.4.3.3}.

Expert judgement based on the available evidence therefore suggests that the TCRE is likely between 0.8°C to 2.5°C per 1000 PgC, for cumulative CO2 emissions less than about 2000 PgC until the time at which temperature peaks. Under these conditions, and for low to medium estimates of climate sensitivity, the TCRE is nearly identical to the peak {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} to cumulative carbon emissions. For high climate sensitivity, strong carbon cycle climate feedbacks or large cumulative emissions, the peak warming can be delayed and the peak response may be different from TCRE, but is often poorly constrained by models and observations. The range of TCRE assessed here is consistent with other recent attempts to synthesize the available evidence ({cite.12.'NRC_2011}; {cite.12.'Matthews_et_al_2012}). The results by Schwartz et al. (2010, 2012) imply a much larger warming for the carbon emitted over the historical period and have been questioned by {cite.12.'Knutti_and_Plattner_2012 Knutti and Plattner (2012)} for neglecting the relevant {Glossary.*Adjustment_time_or_response_time_Ta response time} scales and combining a transient airborne fraction with an {Glossary.*Equilibrium_climate_sensitivity equilibrium climate sensitivity}.

The TCRE can be compared to the temperature response to emissions on a time scale of about 1000 years after emissions cease. This can be estimated from the likely range of equilibrium climate sensitivity (1.5°C to 4.5°C) and a cumulative CO2 airborne fraction after about 1000 years of about 25 ± 5% ({cite.12.'Archer_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Joos_et_al_2013}). Again combining the extreme values would suggest a range of 0.6°C to 2.7°C per 1000 PgC, and 1.5°C per 1000 PgC for an ECS of 3°C and a cumulative airborne fraction of 25%. However, this equilibrium estimate is based on feedbacks estimated for the present day climate. Climate and carbon cycle feedbacks may increase substantially on long time scales and for high cumulative CO2 emissions (see {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_3 Section 12.5.3}), introducing large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in particular on the upper bound. Based on {Glossary.*Paleoclimate paleoclimate} data and an analytical model, {cite.12.'Goodwin_et_al_2009 Goodwin et al. (2009)} estimate a long term RF of 1.5 W m–2 for an emission of 1000 PgC. For an equilibrium climate sensitivity of 3°C this corresponds to a warming of 1.2°C on millennial time scales, consistent with the climate carbon cycle models results discussed above.

The uncertainty in TCRE is caused by the uncertainty in the physical feedbacks and ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} (reflected in TCR) and uncertainties in carbon cycle feedbacks (affecting the cumulative airborne fraction of CO2). TCRE only characterizes the warming due to CO2 emissions, and contributions from non-CO2 gases need to be considered separately when estimating likelihoods to stay below a temperature limit. Warming as a function of cumulative CO2 emissions is similar in the four RCP scenarios, and larger than that due to CO2 alone, since nonCO2 forcings contribute warming in these scenarios (compare {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45} f, i) ({cite.12.'Hajima_et_al_2012}).
