index: hide
name: Fungal Diversity

The  **fungi** are very diverse, comprising seven major groups. Not all of the seven groups contain pathogens. Some of these groups are generally associated with plants and include plant pathogens. For example, Urediniomycetes and Ustilagomycetes include the plant  **rusts** and  **smuts**, respectively. These form reddish or dark masses, respectively, on plants as rusts (red) or smuts (dark). Some species have substantial economic impact because of their ability to reduce crop yields. Glomeromycota includes the  **mycorrhizal fungi**, important symbionts with plant roots that can promote plant growth by acting like an extended root system. The Glomeromycota are obligate symbionts, meaning that they can only survive when associated with plant roots; the fungi receive carbohydrates from the plant and the plant benefits from the increased ability to take up nutrients and minerals from the soil. The Chytridiomycetes ( **chytrids**) are small fungi, but are extremely ecologically important. Chytrids are generally aquatic and have flagellated, motile gametes; specific types are implicated in amphibian declines around the world. Because of their medical importance, we will focus on Zygomycota, Ascomycota, Basidiomycota, and Microsporidia. {'Figure_5_3_TaxaTable Figure 5.3.TaxaTable} summarizes the characteristics of these medically important groups of fungi.

The  **Zygomycota** (zygomycetes) are mainly saprophytes with coenocytic hyphae and haploid nuclei. They use sporangiospores for asexual reproduction. The group name comes from the  **zygospores** that they use for sexual reproduction ({'Figure_5_3_zygo Figure 5.3.zygo}), which have hard walls formed from the fusion of reproductive cells from two individuals. Zygomycetes are important for food science and as crop pathogens. One example is  **Rhizopus stolonifer** ({'Figure_5_3_spores Figure 5.3.spores}), an important bread mold that also causes rice seedling blight.  **Mucor** is a genus of fungi that can potentially cause necrotizing infections in humans, although most species are intolerant of temperatures found in mammalian bodies ({'Figure_5_3_spores Figure 5.3.spores}).

The  **Ascomycota** include fungi that are used as food (edible mushrooms, morels, and truffles), others that are common causes of food spoilage (bread molds and plant pathogens), and still others that are human pathogens. Ascomycota may have septate hyphae and cup-shaped fruiting bodies called  **ascocarps**. Some genera of Ascomycota use sexually produced  **ascospores** as well as asexual spores called  **conidia**, but sexual phases have not been discovered or described for others. Some produce an  **ascus** containing ascospores within an ascocarp ({'Figure_5_3_asclife Figure 5.3.asclife}).

Examples of the Ascomycota include several bread molds and minor pathogens, as well as species capable of causing more serious mycoses. Species in the genus  *Aspergillus* are important causes of allergy and infection, and are useful in research and in the production of certain fermented alcoholic beverages such as Japanese  *sake*. The fungus  **Aspergillus flavus** *,* a contaminant of nuts and stored grains, produces an  **aflatoxin** that is both a toxin and the most potent known natural carcinogen.  **Neurospora crassa** is of particular use in genetics research because the spores produced by meiosis are kept inside the ascus in a row that reflects the cell divisions that produced them, giving a direct view of segregation and assortment of genes ({'Figure_5_3_sexspores Figure 5.3.sexspores}).  **Penicillium** produces the antibiotic penicillin ({'Figure_5_3_asclife Figure 5.3.asclife}).

Many species of ascomycetes are medically important. A large number of species in the genera  **Trichophyton**,  **Microsporum**, and  **Epidermophyton** are  **dermatophytes**, pathogenic fungi capable of causing skin infections such as athlete’s foot, jock itch, and  **ringworm**.  **Blastomyces dermatitidis** is a dimorphic fungus that can cause  **blastomycosis**, a respiratory infection that, if left untreated, can become disseminated to other body sites, sometimes leading to death. Another important respiratory pathogen is the dimorphic fungus  **Histoplasma capsulatum** ({'Figure_5_3_struct Figure 5.3.struct}) *,* which is associated with birds and bats in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys.  **Coccidioides immitis** causes the serious lung disease  **Valley fever**.  **Candida albicans**, the most common cause of vaginal and other yeast infections, is also an ascomycete fungus; it is a part of the normal microbiota of the skin, intestine, genital tract, and ear ({'Figure_5_3_asclife Figure 5.3.asclife}). Ascomycetes also cause plant diseases, including ergot infections, Dutch elm disease, and powdery mildews.

 **Saccharomyces** yeasts, including the baker’s yeast  *S. cerevisiae*, are unicellular ascomycetes with haploid and diploid stages ({'Figure_5_3_ascomyLC Figure 5.3.ascomyLC}). This and other  *Saccharomyces* species are used for brewing beer.


{image:'Figure_5_3_asclife}
        


{image:'Figure_5_3_sexspores}
        


{image:'Figure_5_3_ascomyLC}
        

The  **Basidiomycota** (basidiomycetes) are fungi that have  **basidia** (club-shaped structures) that produce  **basidiospores** (spores produced through budding) within fruiting bodies called  **basidiocarps** ({'Figure_5_3_basidioLC Figure 5.3.basidioLC}). They are important as decomposers and as food. This group includes rusts, stinkhorns, puffballs, and mushrooms. Several species are of particular importance.  **Cryptococcus neoformans**, a fungus commonly found as a yeast in the environment, can cause serious lung infections when inhaled by individuals with weakened immune systems. The edible meadow mushroom,  *Agricus campestris*, is a basidiomycete, as is the poisonous mushroom  *Amanita* *phalloides*, known as the death cap. The deadly toxins produced by  *A. phalloides* have been used to study transcription.


{image:'Figure_5_3_basidioLC}
        

Finally, the  **Microsporidia** are unicellular fungi that are obligate intracellular parasites. They lack mitochondria, peroxisomes, and centrioles, but their spores release a unique  **polar tubule** that pierces the host cell membrane to allow the fungus to gain entry into the cell. A number of microsporidia are human pathogens, and infections with microsporidia are called  **microsporidiosis**. One pathogenic species is  **Enterocystozoan bieneusi**, which can cause symptoms such as diarrhea, cholecystitis (inflammation of the gall bladder), and in rare cases, respiratory illness.


{image:'Figure_5_3_TaxaTable}
        
