index: hide
name: Papillomas

 **Papillomas** ( **warts**) are the expression of common skin infections by  **human papillomavirus (HPV)** and are transmitted by direct contact. There are many types of HPV, and they lead to a variety of different presentations, such as  **common warts**,  **plantar warts**,  **flat warts**, and  **filiform warts**. HPV can also cause sexually-transmitted genital warts, which will be discussed in <link:>. Vaccination is available for some strains of HPV.

Common warts tend to develop on fingers, the backs of hands, and around nails in areas with broken skin. In contrast, plantar warts (also called foot warts) develop on the sole of the foot and can grow inwards, causing pain and pressure during walking. Flat warts can develop anywhere on the body, are often numerous, and are relatively smooth and small compared with other wart types. Filiform warts are long, threadlike warts that grow quickly.

In some cases, the immune system may be strong enough to prevent warts from forming or to eradicate established warts. However, treatment of established warts is typically required. There are many available treatments for warts, and their effectiveness varies. Common warts can be frozen off with liquid nitrogen. Topical applications of  **salicylic acid** may also be effective. Other options are electrosurgery (burning), curettage (cutting), excision, painting with cantharidin (which causes the wart to die so it can more easily be removed), laser treatments, treatment with bleomycin, chemical peels, and immunotherapy ({'Figure_21_3_warts Figure 21.3.warts}).


{image:'Figure_21_3_warts}
        
