index: hide
name: 

 *Use the following information to answer the next four exercises.* A box is filled with several party favors. It contains 12 hats, 15 noisemakers, ten finger traps, and five bags of confetti.


Let  *H* = the event of getting a hat.


Let  *N* = the event of getting a noisemaker.


Let  *F* = the event of getting a finger trap.


Let  *C* = the event of getting a bag of confetti.

 *Use the following information to answer the next six exercises.* A jar of 150 jelly beans contains 22 red jelly beans, 38 yellow, 20 green, 28 purple, 26 blue, and the rest are orange.


Let  *B* = the event of getting a blue jelly bean


Let  *G* = the event of getting a green jelly bean.


Let  *O* = the event of getting an orange jelly bean.


Let  *P* = the event of getting a purple jelly bean.


Let  *R* = the event of getting a red jelly bean.


Let  *Y* = the event of getting a yellow jelly bean.

 *Use the following information to answer the next six exercises.* There are 23 countries in North America, 12 countries in South America, 47 countries in Europe, 44 countries in Asia, 54 countries in Africa, and 14 in Oceania (Pacific Ocean region).


Let  *A* = the event that a country is in Asia.


Let  *E* = the event that a country is in Europe.


Let  *F* = the event that a country is in Africa.


Let  *N* = the event that a country is in North America.


Let  *O* = the event that a country is in Oceania.


Let  *S* = the event that a country is in South America.

 *Use the following information to answer the next two exercises.* You see a game at a local fair. You have to throw a dart at a color wheel. Each section on the color wheel is equal in area.



{image:'CNX_Stats_C03_M01_21}
        

Let  *B* = the event of landing on blue.


Let  *R* = the event of landing on red.


Let  *G* = the event of landing on green.


Let  *Y* = the event of landing on yellow.


 *Use the following information to answer the next ten exercises.* On a baseball team, there are infielders and outfielders. Some players are great hitters, and some players are not great hitters.


Let  *I* = the event that a player in an infielder.


Let  *O* = the event that a player is an outfielder.


Let  *H* = the event that a player is a great hitter.


Let  *N* = the event that a player is not a great hitter.

 *Use the following information to answer the next two exercises.* You are rolling a fair, six-sided number cube. Let  *E* = the event that it lands on an even number. Let  *M* = the event that it lands on a multiple of three.
