# What happens to my biopsy and what does it tell my physician?

When your doctor completes the biopsy, he or she will send the biopsy tissue to the lab where the pathologist takes a very small slice of the tissue to look at under a microscope. Each type of cell looks very different under a microscope so the pathologist will be able to tell the type of tumor you have and whether it is benign or malignant (cancerous or not).
If the piece of biopsy tissue is large enough, the pathologist may also be able to “grade” the tumor. When the pathologist grades the tumor, he is comparing the tumor cells to normal cells. The tumor grade describes how much the cells from the biopsy tissue resemble normal lung cells. Tumor grades are different for different kinds of cancer, but typically, a lower grade is better. Based on what he sees under the microscope, the pathologist will also determine how fast the tumor may grow and spread.

When your pathologist grades your tumor, he will also send your tissue for molecular testing. Because we know that different types of lung cancer are caused by new or acquired mutations that have different genomic forms, we can use molecular testing to identify the specific genomic makeup of the tumor. Knowing the specific genetic form of your tumor may help your team to create a treatment plan that is specific to your tumor.
On tissue biopsies that are larger, the pathologist will also look at the lung tissue around the tumor to see if there are cancer cells outside of the tumor and in the lung tissue. The pathologist prepares a pathology report that includes all of the findings and sends that report to the rest of your healthcare team.

Your healthcare team will use the tumor grade and other findings to begin to develop a treatment plan designed specifically for you. Your doctor will help you understand exactly what the grade of your tumor means and how the grade will help guide your treatment.

# Why does the doctor need to repeat the biopsy?

When you are initially diagnosed the pathologist’s first priority is to use your tissue biopsy to determine which specific type of lung cancer you have. This often requires looking at multiple slices of the tumor tissue and applying special stains to the tissue to help with the right diagnosis. The result is often that the tissue is used up and there is nothing left for genomic testing. This happens with 30% to 50% of lung cancer biopsies, especially when they are smaller needle biopsies (1–3).

The more common reason for repeating genomic testing is because the initial tissue sample was only partly genotyped or undergenotyped. Sadly, this happens the majority of the time and typically occurs when you are only tested for EGFR and ALK, and nothing is found. This could be because tests less sensitive than NGS were used for EGFR or ALK which may miss a significant number of mutations (4–8). Another common reason for undergenotyping is because local non-NGS testing for EGFR and ALK depletes or exhausts your tissue sample and so they cannot test for additional genes even though they may be targetable.

Cancer cells evolve over time, especially when the cancer has been treated. Your cancer one year from diagnosis for example, isn’t necessarily the same cancer originally seen under the microscope when you were first diagnosed. The only way to know what the cancer has potentially evolved into is to re-biopsy the tissue and examine it for changes.

Fortunately, there are “liquid biopsy tests” available that use various technologies so that you can get complete genomic testing with simple blood test. The GeneStrat® blood-based genomic test from Biodesix provides actionable mutations that can direct the use of targeted therapy in 72 hours. Another method, used by the Guardant360 test, is likely to find a mutation that drives your cancer in lung adenocarcinoma in all but about 1⁄4 of patients. When you are initially diagnosed there is rarely more than one driver mutation found. Some are targetable and many are not, but if any driving mutation is found then there is no need to repeat an invasive biopsy.

If your cancer has been treated with a targeted therapy but has progressed, a liquid biopsy may be used initially instead of repeating an invasive biopsy. The results typically come back in 3-14 days, depending on the test utilized, and if the blood test does not detect the new mutations driving your cancer, then your doctor may recommend a repeat invasive tissue biopsy.
