index: hide
name: The Cardiac Cycle

The main purpose of the heart is to pump blood through the body; it does so in a repeating sequence called the cardiac cycle. The  **cardiac cycle** is the coordination of the filling and emptying of the heart of blood by electrical signals that cause the heart muscles to contract and relax. The human heart beats over 100,000 times per day. In each cardiac cycle, the heart contracts ( **systole**), pushing out the blood and pumping it through the body; this is followed by a relaxation phase ( **diastole**), where the heart fills with blood, as illustrated in {'Figure_40_3_3 Figure 40.3.3}. The atria contract at the same time, forcing blood through the atrioventricular valves into the ventricles. Closing of the atrioventricular valves produces a monosyllabic “lup” sound. Following a brief delay, the ventricles contract at the same time forcing blood through the semilunar valves into the aorta and the artery transporting blood to the lungs (via the pulmonary artery). Closing of the semilunar valves produces a monosyllabic “dup” sound.


{image:'Figure_40_3_3}
        

The pumping of the heart is a function of the cardiac muscle cells, or cardiomyocytes, that make up the heart muscle.  **Cardiomyocytes**, shown in {'Figure_B40_3_4 Figure B40.3.4}, are distinctive muscle cells that are striated like skeletal muscle but pump rhythmically and involuntarily like smooth muscle; they are connected by intercalated disks exclusive to cardiac muscle. They are self-stimulated for a period of time and isolated cardiomyocytes will beat if given the correct balance of nutrients and electrolytes.


{image:'Figure_B40_3_4}
        

The autonomous beating of cardiac muscle cells is regulated by the heart’s internal pacemaker that uses electrical signals to time the beating of the heart. The electrical signals and mechanical actions, illustrated in {'Figure_40_3_5 Figure 40.3.5}, are intimately intertwined. The internal pacemaker starts at the  **sinoatrial (SA) node**, which is located near the wall of the right atrium. Electrical charges spontaneously pulse from the SA node causing the two atria to contract in unison. The pulse reaches a second node, called the atrioventricular (AV) node, between the right atrium and right ventricle where it pauses for approximately 0.1 second before spreading to the walls of the ventricles. From the AV node, the electrical impulse enters the bundle of His, then to the left and right bundle branches extending through the interventricular septum. Finally, the Purkinje fibers conduct the impulse from the apex of the heart up the ventricular myocardium, and then the ventricles contract. This pause allows the atria to empty completely into the ventricles before the ventricles pump out the blood. The electrical impulses in the heart produce electrical currents that flow through the body and can be measured on the skin using electrodes. This information can be observed as an  **electrocardiogram (ECG)**—a recording of the electrical impulses of the cardiac muscle.


{image:'Figure_40_3_5}
        
