index: hide
name: Pre-implantation Embryonic Development

Following fertilization, the zygote and its associated membranes, together referred to as the  **conceptus**, continue to be projected toward the uterus by peristalsis and beating cilia. During its journey to the uterus, the zygote undergoes five or six rapid mitotic cell divisions. Although each  **cleavage** results in more cells, it does not increase the total volume of the conceptus ({'Figure_29_2_1 Figure 29.2.1}). Each daughter cell produced by cleavage is called a  **blastomere** (blastos = “germ,” in the sense of a seed or sprout).

Approximately 3 days after fertilization, a 16-cell conceptus reaches the uterus. The cells that had been loosely grouped are now compacted and look more like a solid mass. The name given to this structure is the  **morula** (morula = “little mulberry”). Once inside the uterus, the conceptus floats freely for several more days. It continues to divide, creating a ball of approximately 100 cells, and consuming nutritive endometrial secretions called uterine milk while the uterine lining thickens. The ball of now tightly bound cells starts to secrete fluid and organize themselves around a fluid-filled cavity, the  **blastocoel**. At this developmental stage, the conceptus is referred to as a  **blastocyst**. Within this structure, a group of cells forms into an  **inner cell mass**, which is fated to become the embryo. The cells that form the outer shell are called  **trophoblasts** (trophe = “to feed” or “to nourish”). These cells will develop into the chorionic sac and the fetal portion of the  **placenta** (the organ of nutrient, waste, and gas exchange between mother and the developing offspring).

The inner mass of embryonic cells is totipotent during this stage, meaning that each cell has the potential to differentiate into any cell type in the human body. Totipotency lasts for only a few days before the cells’ fates are set as being the precursors to a specific lineage of cells.


{image:'Figure_29_2_1}
        

As the blastocyst forms, the trophoblast excretes enzymes that begin to degrade the zona pellucida. In a process called “hatching,” the conceptus breaks free of the zona pellucida in preparation for implantation.
