index: hide
name: Molecular Cloning

Herbert  **Boyer** and Stanley  **Cohen** first demonstrated the complete  **molecular cloning** process in 1973 when they successfully cloned genes from the African clawed frog ( **Xenopus laevis**) into a bacterial plasmid that was then introduced into the bacterial host  **Escherichia coli**. Molecular cloning is a set of methods used to construct recombinant DNA and incorporate it into a host organism; it makes use of a number of molecular tools that are derived from microorganisms.

## Restriction Enzymes and Ligases

In recombinant DNA technology, DNA molecules are manipulated using naturally occurring enzymes derived mainly from bacteria and viruses. The creation of recombinant DNA molecules is possible due to the use of naturally occurring  **restriction endonucleases** ( **restriction enzymes**), bacterial enzymes produced as a protection mechanism to cut and destroy foreign cytoplasmic DNA that is most commonly a result of bacteriophage infection. Stewart  **Linn** and Werner  **Arber** discovered restriction enzymes in their 1960s studies of how  *E. coli* limits bacteriophage replication on infection. Today, we use restriction enzymes extensively for cutting DNA fragments that can then be spliced into another DNA molecule to form recombinant molecules. Each restriction enzyme cuts DNA at a characteristic  **recognition site**, a specific, usually palindromic, DNA sequence typically between four to six base pairs in length. A palindrome is a sequence of letters that reads the same forward as backward. (The word “level” is an example of a palindrome.) Palindromic DNA sequences contain the same base sequences in the 5ʹ to 3ʹ direction on one strand as in the 5ʹ to 3ʹ direction on the complementary strand. A restriction enzyme recognizes the DNA palindrome and cuts each backbone at identical positions in the palindrome. Some restriction enzymes cut to produce molecules that have complementary overhangs ( **sticky ends**) while others cut without generating such overhangs, instead producing  **blunt ends** ({'Figure_12_1_Recuts Figure 12.1.Recuts}).

Molecules with complementary sticky ends can easily  **anneal**, or form hydrogen bonds between complementary bases, at their sticky ends. The annealing step allows  **hybridization** of the single-stranded overhangs. Hybridization refers to the joining together of two complementary single strands of DNA. Blunt ends can also attach together, but less efficiently than sticky ends due to the lack of complementary overhangs facilitating the process. In either case,  **ligation** by  **DNA ligase** can then rejoin the two sugar-phosphate backbones of the DNA through covalent bonding, making the molecule a continuous double strand. In 1972, Paul  **Berg**, a Stanford biochemist, was the first to produce a recombinant DNA molecule using this technique, combining the SV40 monkey virus with  *E. coli* bacteriophage lambda to create a hybrid.


{image:'Figure_12_1_Recuts}
        

## Plasmids

After restriction digestion, genes of interest are commonly inserted into  **plasmids**, small pieces of typically circular, double-stranded DNA that replicate independently of the bacterial chromosome (see <link:>). In recombinant DNA technology, plasmids are often used as  **vectors**, DNA molecules that carry DNA fragments from one organism to another. Plasmids used as vectors can be genetically engineered by researchers and scientific supply companies to have specialized properties, as illustrated by the commonly used plasmid vector  **pUC19** ({'Figure_12_1_pUC19 Figure 12.1.pUC19}). Some  **plasmid vectors** contain genes that confer  **antibiotic resistance**; these resistance genes allow researchers to easily find plasmid-containing colonies by plating them on media containing the corresponding antibiotic. The antibiotic kills all host cells that do not harbor the desired plasmid vector, but those that contain the vector are able to survive and grow.

Plasmid vectors used for cloning typically have a  **polylinker site**, or  **multiple cloning site (MCS)**. A polylinker site is a short sequence containing multiple unique restriction enzyme recognition sites that are used for inserting DNA into the plasmid after restriction digestion of both the DNA and the plasmid. Having these multiple restriction enzyme recognition sites within the polylinker site makes the plasmid vector versatile, so it can be used for many different cloning experiments involving different restriction enzymes.

This polylinker site is often found within a  **reporter gene**, another gene sequence artificially engineered into the plasmid that encodes a protein that allows for visualization of DNA insertion. The reporter gene allows a researcher to distinguish host cells that contain recombinant plasmids with cloned DNA fragments from host cells that only contain the non-recombinant plasmid vector. The most common reporter gene used in plasmid vectors is the bacterial  **lacZ** gene encoding beta-galactosidase, an enzyme that naturally degrades lactose but can also degrade a colorless synthetic analog  **X-gal**, thereby producing blue colonies on X-gal–containing media. The  *lacZ* reporter gene is disabled when the recombinant DNA is spliced into the plasmid. Because the LacZ protein is not produced when the gene is disabled, X-gal is not degraded and white colonies are produced, which can then be isolated. This  **blue-white screening** method is described later and shown in {'Figure_12_1_MolCloning Figure 12.1.MolCloning}. In addition to these features, some plasmids come pre-digested and with an enzyme linked to the linearized plasmid to aid in ligation after the insertion of foreign DNA fragments.


{image:'Figure_12_1_pUC19}
        

## Molecular Cloning using Transformation

The most commonly used mechanism for introducing engineered plasmids into a bacterial cell is  **transformation**, a process in which bacteria take up free DNA from their surroundings. In nature, free DNA typically comes from other lysed bacterial cells; in the laboratory, free DNA in the form of recombinant plasmids is introduced to the cell’s surroundings.

Some bacteria, such as  **Bacillus** spp., are naturally competent, meaning they are able to take up foreign DNA. However, not all bacteria are naturally competent. In most cases, bacteria must be made artificially competent in the laboratory by increasing the permeability of the cell membrane. This can be achieved through chemical treatments that neutralize charges on the cell membrane or by exposing the bacteria to an electric field that creates microscopic pores in the cell membrane. These methods yield chemically competent or electrocompetent bacteria, respectively.

Following the transformation protocol, bacterial cells are plated onto an antibiotic-containing medium to inhibit the growth of the many host cells that were not transformed by the plasmid conferring antibiotic resistance. A technique called  **blue-white screening** is then used for  *lacZ*-encoding plasmid vectors such as pUC19. Blue colonies have a functional beta-galactosidase enzyme because the  *lacZ* gene is uninterrupted, with no foreign DNA inserted into the polylinker site. These colonies typically result from the digested, linearized plasmid religating to itself. However, white colonies lack a functional beta-galactosidase enzyme, indicating the insertion of foreign DNA within the polylinker site of the plasmid vector, thus disrupting the  *lacZ* gene. Thus, white colonies resulting from this blue-white screening contain plasmids with an insert and can be further screened to characterize the foreign DNA. To be sure the correct DNA was incorporated into the plasmid, the DNA insert can then be sequenced.

## Molecular Cloning Using Conjugation or Transduction

The bacterial process of  **conjugation** (see <link:>) can also be manipulated for molecular cloning.  **F plasmids**, or fertility plasmids, are transferred between bacterial cells through the process of conjugation. Recombinant DNA can be transferred by conjugation when bacterial cells containing a recombinant F plasmid are mixed with compatible bacterial cells lacking the plasmid. F plasmids encode a surface structure called an  **F pilus** that facilitates contact between a cell containing an F plasmid and one without an F plasmid. On contact, a cytoplasmic bridge forms between the two cells and the F-plasmid-containing cell replicates its plasmid, transferring a copy of the recombinant F plasmid to the recipient cell. Once it has received the recombinant F plasmid, the recipient cell can produce its own F pilus and facilitate transfer of the recombinant F plasmid to an additional cell. The use of conjugation to transfer recombinant F plasmids to recipient cells is another effective way to introduce recombinant DNA molecules into host cells.

Alternatively,  **bacteriophages** can be used to introduce recombinant DNA into host bacterial cells through a manipulation of the  **transduction** process (see <link:>). In the laboratory, DNA fragments of interest can be engineered into  **phagemids**, which are plasmids that have phage sequences that allow them to be packaged into bacteriophages. Bacterial cells can then be infected with these bacteriophages so that the recombinant phagemids can be introduced into the bacterial cells. Depending on the type of phage, the recombinant DNA may be integrated into the host bacterial genome (lysogeny), or it may exist as a plasmid in the host’s cytoplasm.


{image:'Figure_12_1_MolCloning}
        
