index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Fermentation uses an organic molecule as a final electron acceptor to regenerate NAD<sup>+</sup> from NADH so that glycolysis can continue.
  * Fermentation does not involve an electron transport system, and no ATP is made by the fermentation process directly. Fermenters make very little ATP—only two ATP molecules per glucose molecule during glycolysis.
  * Microbial fermentation processes have been used for the production of foods and pharmaceuticals, and for the identification of microbes.
  * During lactic acid fermentation, pyruvate accepts electrons from NADH and is reduced to lactic acid. Microbes performing  **homolactic fermentation** produce only lactic acid as the fermentation product; microbes performing  **heterolactic fermentation** produce a mixture of lactic acid, ethanol and/or acetic acid, and CO<sub>2</sub>.
  * Lactic acid production by the normal microbiota prevents growth of pathogens in certain body regions and is important for the health of the gastrointestinal tract.
  * During ethanol fermentation, pyruvate is first decarboxylated (releasing CO<sub>2</sub>) to acetaldehyde, which then accepts electrons from NADH, reducing acetaldehyde to ethanol. Ethanol fermentation is used for the production of alcoholic beverages, for making bread products rise, and for biofuel production.
  * Fermentation products of pathways (e.g., propionic acid fermentation) provide distinctive flavors to food products. Fermentation is used to produce chemical solvents (acetone-butanol-ethanol fermentation) and pharmaceuticals (mixed acid fermentation).
  * Specific types of microbes may be distinguished by their fermentation pathways and products. Microbes may also be differentiated according to the substrates they are able to ferment.
