index: hide
public: ar5-Box-8.2
name: Box 8.2
title: Box 8.2 - Grouping Forcing Compounds by Common Properties

As many compounds cause RF when their atmospheric concentration is changed, it can be useful to refer to groups of compounds with similar properties. Here we discuss two primary groupings: well-mixed greenhouse gases ({Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs}) and {Glossary.*Near_term_climate_forcers near-term climate forcers} (NTCFs).

We define as ‘well-mixed’ those greenhouse gases that are sufficiently mixed throughout the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} that concentration measurements from a few remote surface sites can characterize the climate-relevant {Glossary.*Burden atmospheric burden}; although these gases may still have local variation near sources and sinks and even small hemispheric gradients. Global {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} per unit {Topics.*Emissions emission} and emission metrics for these gases thus do not depend on the geographic location of the emission, and forcing calculations can assume even horizontal distributions. These gases, or a subset of them, have sometimes been referred to as ‘long-lived greenhouse gases’ as they are well mixed because their atmospheric lifetimes are much greater than the time scale of a few years for atmospheric mixing, but the physical property that causes the aforementioned common characteristics is more directly associated with their mixing within the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}. WMGHGs include {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}, {Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O}, {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}, SF6, and many halogenated species. Conversely, {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} is not a {Glossary.*Well_mixed_greenhouse_gas WMGHG}.

We define ‘near-term climate forcers’ (NTCFs) as those compounds whose impact on climate occurs primarily within the first decade after their emission. This set of compounds is composed primarily of those with short lifetimes in the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} compared to WMGHGs, and has been sometimes referred to as short-lived climate forcers or short-lived climate pollutants. However, the common property that is of greatest interest to a climate assessment is the time scale over which their impact on climate is felt. This set of compounds includes methane, which is also a WMGHG, as well as ozone and aerosols, or their {Glossary.*Precursors precursors}, and some halogenated species that are not WMGHGs. These compounds do not accumulate in the atmosphere at decadal to centennial time scales, and so their effect on climate is predominantly in the near term following their emission.
