index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-8.2
name: FAQ 8.2
title: FAQ 8.2 - Do Improvements in Air Quality Have an Effect on Climate Change?

Yes they do, but depending on which pollutant(s) they limit, they can either cool or warm the climate. For example, whereas a reduction in sulphur dioxide (SO2) {Topics.*Emissions emissions} leads to more warming, nitrogen oxide (NOx) emission control has both a cooling (through reducing of tropospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone}) and a warming effect (due to its impact on methane {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} and aerosol production). Air pollution can also affect precipitation patterns.

Air quality is nominally a measure of airborne surface pollutants, such as ozone, carbon monoxide, NOx and aerosols (solid or liquid particulate matter). Exposure to such pollutants exacerbates respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, harms plants and damages buildings. For these reasons, most major urban centres try to control discharges of airborne pollutants.

Unlike carbon dioxide ({Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}) and other well-mixed greenhouse gases, tropospheric ozone and aerosols may last in the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} only for a few days to a few weeks, though indirect couplings within the {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system} can prolong their impact. These pollutants are usually most potent near their area of emission or formation, where they can force local or regional perturbations to climate, even if their globally averaged effect is small.

Air pollutants affect climate differently according to their physical and chemical characteristics. Pollution-generated greenhouse gases will impact climate primarily through shortwave and {Glossary.*Longwave_radiation longwave radiation}, while aerosols can in addition affect climate through cloud–aerosol interactions.

Controls on {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} emissions of methane ({FAQ_8_2 FAQ 8.2}, {'FAQ_8_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}) to lower surface ozone have been identified as ‘win–win’ situations. Consequences of controlling other ozone {Glossary.*Precursors precursors} are not always as clear. NOx emission controls, for instance, might be expected to have a cooling effect as they reduce tropospheric ozone, but their impact on {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} lifetime and aerosol formation is more likely instead to cause overall warming.

{image:'FAQ_8_2_Figure_1}

Satellite observations have identified increasing atmospheric concentrations of SO2 (the primary precursor to scattering sulphate aerosols) from coal-burning power plants over eastern Asia during the last few decades. The most recent power plants use scrubbers to reduce such emissions (albeit not the concurrent CO2 emissions and associated long-term climate warming). This improves air quality, but also reduces the cooling effect of sulphate aerosols and therefore exacerbates warming. {Glossary.*Aerosol Aerosol} cooling occurs through aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions and is estimated at –0.9 W m–2 (all aerosols combined, {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4.8_3_4_3 Section 8.3.4.3}) since pre-industrial, having grown especially during the second half of the 20th century when anthropogenic emissions rose sharply. {Glossary.*Black_carbon Black carbon} or soot, on the other hand, absorbs heat in the atmosphere (leading to a 0.4 W m–2 {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing} from anthropogenic fossil and biofuel emissions) and, when deposited on snow, reduces its {Glossary.*Albedo albedo}, or ability to reflect sunlight. Reductions of black carbon emissions can therefore have a cooling effect, but the additional interaction of black carbon with clouds is uncertain and could lead to some counteracting warming.

Air quality controls might also target a specific anthropogenic activity sector, such as transportation or energy production. In that case, co-emitted species within the targeted sector lead to a complex mix of chemistry and climate perturbations. For example, smoke from biofuel combustion contains a mixture of both absorbing and scattering particles as well as ozone precursors, for which the combined climate impact can be difficult to ascertain.

Thus, surface air quality controls will have some consequences on climate. Some couplings between the targeted emissions and climate are still poorly understood or identified, including the effects of air pollutants on precipitation patterns, making it difficult to fully quantify these consequences. There is an important twist, too, in the potential effect of climate change on air quality. In particular, an observed correlation between surface ozone and temperature in polluted regions indicates that higher temperatures from climate change alone could worsen summertime pollution, suggesting a ‘climate penalty’. This penalty implies stricter surface ozone controls will be required to achieve a specific target. In addition, {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} changes in the frequency and duration of stagnation events could impact air quality conditions. These features will be regionally variable and difficult to assess, but better understanding, quantification and modelling of these processes will clarify the overall interaction between air pollutants and climate.
