index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-8.1
name: FAQ 8.1
title: FAQ 8.1 - How Important Is Water Vapour to Climate Change?

As the largest contributor to the natural {Glossary.*Greenhouse_effect greenhouse effect}, water vapour plays an essential role in the Earth’s climate. However, the amount of water vapour in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} is controlled mostly by air temperature, rather than by {Topics.*Emissions emissions}. For that reason, scientists consider it a {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} agent, rather than a forcing to climate change. {Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} emissions of water vapour through irrigation or power plant cooling have a negligible impact on the global climate.

Water vapour is the primary {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} in the Earth’s {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}. The contribution of water vapour to the natural greenhouse effect relative to that of carbon dioxide ({Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}) depends on the accounting method, but can be considered to be approximately two to three times greater. Additional water vapour is injected into the atmosphere from anthropogenic activities, mostly through increased evaporation from irrigated crops, but also through power plant cooling, and marginally through the combustion of fossil fuel. One may therefore question why there is so much focus on CO2, and not on water vapour, as a forcing to climate change.

Water vapour behaves differently from CO2 in one fundamental way: it can condense and precipitate. When air with high humidity cools, some of the vapour condenses into water droplets or ice particles and precipitates. The typical residence time of water vapour in the atmosphere is ten days. The flux of water vapour into the atmosphere from anthropogenic sources is considerably less than from ‘natural’ evaporation. Therefore, it has a negligible impact on overall concentrations, and does not contribute significantly to the long-term greenhouse effect. This is the main reason why tropospheric water vapour (typically below 10 km altitude) is not considered to be an anthropogenic gas contributing to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing}.

Anthropogenic emissions do have a significant impact on water vapour in the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere}, which is the part of the atmosphere above about 10 km. Increased concentrations of methane ({Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}) due to {Topics.*Human_Influence human activities} lead to an additional {Glossary.*Source source} of water, through oxidation, which partly explains the observed changes in that atmospheric layer. That stratospheric water change has a radiative impact, is considered a forcing, and can be evaluated. Stratospheric concentrations of water have varied significantly in past decades. The full extent of these variations is not well understood and is probably less a forcing than a feedback process added to natural variability. The contribution of stratospheric water vapour to warming, both forcing and feedback, is much smaller than from CH4 or CO2.

The maximum amount of water vapour in the air is controlled by temperature. A typical column of air extending from the surface to the stratosphere in polar regions may contain only a few kilograms of water vapour per square metre, while a similar column of air in the tropics may contain up to 70 kg. With every extra degree of air temperature, the atmosphere can retain around 7% more water vapour (see upper insert in the {FAQ_8_1 FAQ 8.1}, {'FAQ_8_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}). This increase in concentration amplifies the greenhouse effect, and therefore leads to more warming. This process, referred to as the water vapour feedback, is well understood and quantified. It occurs in all models used to estimate climate change, where its strength is consistent with observations. Although an increase in atmospheric water vapour has been observed, this change is recognized as a {Glossary.*Climate_feedback climate feedback} (from increased atmospheric temperature) and should not be interpreted as a radiative forcing from anthropogenic emissions.

{image:'FAQ_8_1_Figure_1}

Currently, water vapour has the largest greenhouse effect in the Earth’s atmosphere. However, other greenhouse gases, primarily CO2, are necessary to sustain the presence of water vapour in the atmosphere. Indeed, if these other gases were removed from the atmosphere, its temperature would drop sufficiently to induce a decrease of water vapour, leading to a runaway drop of the greenhouse effect that would plunge the Earth into a frozen state. So greenhouse gases other than water vapour provide the temperature structure that sustains current levels of atmospheric water vapour. Therefore, although CO2 is the main anthropogenic control knob on climate, water vapour is a strong and fast feedback that amplifies any initial forcing by a typical factor between two and three. Water vapour is not a significant initial forcing, but is nevertheless a fundamental agent of climate change.
