index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.5.1
title: 8.5.1 - Summary of Radiative Forcing by Species and Uncertainties

{'Table_8_5 Table 8.5} has an overview of the RF agents considered here and each of them is given a confidence level for the change in RF over the Industrial Era to the present day. The confidence level is based on the evidence (robust, medium, and limited) and the agreement (high, medium, and low; see further description in {Chapters.1 Chapter 1}). The confidence level of the forcing agents goes beyond the numerical values available in estimates and is an assessment for a particular forcing agent to have a real value within the estimated range. Some of the RF agents have robust evidence such as {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHG} with well documented increases based on high precision measurements as well as contrails as additional clouds which can be seen by direct observations. However, for some forcing agents the evidence is more limited regarding their existence such as {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} influence on cloud cover. The consistency in the findings for a particular forcing agent determines the evaluation of the evidence. A combination of different methods, for example, observations and modeling, and thus the understanding of the processes causing the forcing is important for this evaluation. The agreement is a qualitative judgment of the difference between the various estimates for a particular RF agent. {'Figure_1_11 Figure 1.11} shows how the combined evidence and agreement results in five levels for the confidence level.

{table:'Table_8_5}

Evidence is robust for several of the RF agents because of long term observations of trends over the industrial era and well defined links between atmospheric or land surfaced changes and their radiative effects. Evidence is medium for a few agents where the {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} changes or the link between the forcing agent and its {Glossary.*Radiative_effect radiative effect} are less certain. Medium evidence can be assigned in cases where observations or modelling provide a diversity of information and thus not a consistent picture for a given forcing agent. We assess the evidence to be limited only for rapid adjusment associated with aerosol– cloud interaction where model studies in some cases indicate changes but direct observations of cloud alterations are scarce. High agreement is given only for the {Glossary.*Well_mixed_greenhouse_gas WMGHG} where the relative {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in the RF estimates are much smaller than for the other RF agents. Low agreement can either be due to large diversity in estimates of the magnitude of the forcing or from the fact that the method to estimate the forcing has a large uncertainty. Stratospheric water vapour is an example of the latter with modest difference in the few available estimates but a known large uncertainty in the radiative transfer calculations (see further description in {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_1 Section 8.3.1}).

{'Figure_8_14 Figure 8.14} shows the development of the confidence level over the last four IPCC assessments for the various RF mechanisms. In the previous IPCC reports level of scientific understanding (LOSU) has been used instead of confidence level. For comparison with previous IPCC assessments the LOSU is converted approximately to confidence level. Note that LOSU and confidence level use different terms for their rankings. The figure shows generally increasing confidence levels but also that more RF mechanisms have been included over time. The confidence levels for the RF due to aerosol–radiation interactions, surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} due to land use and volcanic aerosols have been raised and are now at the same ranking as those for change in stratospheric and tropospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone}. This is due to an increased understanding of key parameteres and their uncertainties for the elevated RF agents. For tropospheric and stratospheric ozone changes, research has shown further complexities with changes primarily influencing the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} or the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} being linked to some extent (see {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_3 Section 8.3.3}). The {Glossary.*Rapid_adjustment rapid adjustment} associated with aerosol–cloud interactions is given the confidence level very low and had a similar level in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}. For rapid adjustment associated with aerosol–radiation interactions (previously denoted as semi-direct effect) the confidence level is low and is raised compared to AR4, as the evidence is improved and is now medium (see {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_2 Section 7.5.2}).

{image:'Figure_8_14}

{'Table_8_6 Table 8.6} shows the best estimate of the RF and {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} (for AR5 only) for the various RF agents from the various IPCC assessments. The RF due to WMGHG has increased by 16% and 8% since {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} and AR4, respectively. This is due mainly to increased concentrations (see {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_2 Section 8.3.2}), whereas the other changes for the anthropogenic RF agents compared to AR4 are due to re-evaluations and in some cases from improved understanding. An increased number of studies, additional observational data and better agreement between models and observations can be the causes for such re-evaluations. The best estimates for RF due to aerosol–radiation interactions, {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} on snow and solar irradiance are all substantially decreased in magnitude compared to AR4; otherwise the modifications to the best estimates are rather small. For the RF due to {Glossary.*Aerosol_radiation_interaction aerosol–radiation interaction} and BC on snow the changes in the estimates are based on additional new studies since AR4 (see {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4 Section 8.3.4} and {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5}). For the change in the estimate of the solar irradiance it is a combination on how the RF is calculated, new evidence showing some larger earlier estimates were incorrect, and a downward {Glossary.*Trend trend} observed during recent years in the {Glossary.*Solar_activity solar activity} that has been taken into account (see {Chapters.8.8_4.8_4_1 Section 8.4.1}). The estimate for ERF due to to {Glossary.*Aerosol_cloud_interaction aerosol–cloud interaction} includes rapid adjustment but still this ERF is smaller in magnitude than the AR4 RF estimate due to aerosol–cloud interactions without rapid adjustments (a theoretical construct not quantified in AR5). The uncertainties for ERF due to {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} increase when compared to RF (see {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_2 Section 8.3.2}). We assume the relative ERF uncertainties for CO2 apply to all WMGHG. For the shortlived GHG we do not have sufficient information to include separate ERF uncertainty to each of these forcing agents (see {Chapters.8.8_1.8_1_1.8_1_1_3 Section 8.1.1.3}).

{table:'Table_8_6}

However, for these forcing mechanisms the RF uncertainties are larger than for the WMGHG and thus it is unlikely that rapid adjustments change the uncertainties substantially.

{'Figure_8_15 Figure 8.15} shows the RF for agents listed in {'Table_8_6 Table 8.6} over the 1750–2011 period. The methods for calculation of forcing estimates are described in Sections {Chapters.8.8_3 8.3} and {Chapters.8.8_4 8.4}. For some of the components the forcing estimates are based on observed abundance whereas some are estimated from a combination of model simulations and observations and for others are purely model based. Solid bars are given for ERF, whereas RF values are given as (additional) hatched bars. Similarly the uncertainties are given for ERF in solid lines and dotted lines for RF. An important assumption is that different forcing mechanisms can be treated additively to calculate the total forcing (see {cite.8.'Boucher_and_Haywood_2001}; {cite.8.'Forster_et_al_2007}; {cite.8.'Haywood_and_Schulz_2007}). Total ERF over the Industrial Era calculated from Monte Carlo simulations are shown in {'Figure_8_16 Figure 8.16}, with a best estimate of 2.29 W m–2. For each of the forcing agents a probability density function ({Glossary.*Probability_Density_Function PDF}) is generated based on uncertainties provided in {'Table_8_6 Table 8.6}. The combination of the individual RF agents to derive total forcing follows the same approach as in AR4 ({cite.8.'Forster_et_al_2007}) which is based on the method in {cite.8.'Boucher_and_Haywood_2001 Boucher and Haywood (2001)}. The PDF of the {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} (sum of WMGHG, ozone and stratospheric water vapour) has a more narrow shape than the PDF for the aerosols owing to the much lower relative uncertainty.

{image:'Figure_8_15}

{image:'Figure_8_16}

Therefore, the large uncertainty in the aerosol forcing is the main cause of the large uncertainty in the total anthropogenic ERF. The total {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} is virtually certain to be positive with the probability for a negative value less than 0.1%. Compared to AR4 the total anthropogenic ERF is more strongly positive with an increase of 43%. This is caused by a combination of growth in GHG concentration, and thus strengthening in forcing of WMGHG, and weaker ERF estimates of aerosols (aerosol–radiation and aerosol–cloud interactions) as a result of new assessments of these effects.

{'Figure_8_17 Figure 8.17} shows the forcing over the Industrial Era by emitted compounds (see Supplementary Material Tables 8.SM.6 and 8.SM.7 for actual numbers and references). It is more complex to view the RF by emitted species than by change in atmospheric abundance ({'Figure_8_15 Figure 8.15}) since the number of emitted compounds and changes leading to RF is larger than the number of compounds causing RF directly (see {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_3 Section 8.3.3}). The main reason for this is the indirect effect of several compounds and in particular components involved in atmospheric chemistry (see {Chapters.8.8_2 Section 8.2}). To estimate the RF by the emitted compounds in some cases the emission over the entire Industrial Era is needed (e.g., for CO2) whereas for other compounds (such as ozone and {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}) quite complex simulations are required (see {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_3 Section 8.3.3}). CO is the dominant positive forcing both by abundance and by emit2 ted compound. {Topics.*Emissions Emissions} of CH4, CO, and NMVOC all lead to excess CO2 as one end product if the carbon is of fossil origin and is the reason why the RF of direct CO2 emissions is slightly lower than the RF of abundance change of CO2. For CH4 the contribution from emission is estimated to be almost twice as large as that from the CH4 concentration change, 0.97 (0.80 to 1.14) W m–2 versus 0.48 (0.43 to 0.53) W m–2, respectively. This is because emission of CH4 leads to ozone production, stratospheric water vapour, CO2 (as mentioned above), and importantly affects its own {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} ({Chapters.8.8_2 Section 8.2}). Actually, emissions of CH4 would lead to a stronger RF via the direct CH4 {Glossary.*Greenhouse_effect greenhouse effect} (0.64 W m–2) than the RF from abundance change of CH4 (0.48 W m–2). This is because other compounds have influenced the lifetime of CH4 and reduced the abundance of CH4, most notably NOx. Emissions of CO (0.23 (0.18 to 0.29) W m–2) and NMVOC (0.10 (0.06 to 0.14) W m–2) have only indirect effects on RF through ozone production, CH4 and CO2 and thus contribute an overall positive RF. Emissions of NOX, on the other hand, have indirect effects that lead to positive RF through ozone production and also effects that lead to negative RF through reduction of CH4 lifetime and thus its concentration, and through contributions to nitrate aerosol formation. The best estimate of the overall effect of anthropogenic emissions of NOX is a negative RF (-0.15 (-0.34 to +0.02) W m–2). Emissions of ammonia also contribute to nitrate aerosol formation, with a small offset due to compensating changes in sulphate aerosols. Additionally indirect effects from sulphate on atmospheric compounds are not included here as models typically simulate a small effect, but there are large relative differences in the response between models. Impacts of emissions other than CO2 on the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} via changes in atmospheric composition (ozone or aerosols) are also not shown owing to the limited amount of available information.

{image:'Figure_8_17}

For the WMGHG, the ERF best estimate is the same as the RF. The uncertainty range is slightly larger, however. The total emission-based ERF of WMGHG is 3.00 (2.22 to 3.78) W m–2. That of CO2 is 1.68 (1.33 to 2.03) W m–2; that of CH4 is 0.97 (0.74 to 1.20) W m–2; that of stratospheric ozone-depleting {Glossary.*Halocarbons halocarbons} is 0.18 (0.01 to 0.35) W m–2.

Emissions of BC have a positive RF through aerosol–radiation interactions and BC on snow (0.64 W m–2, see {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4 Section 8.3.4} and {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5}). The emissions from the various compounds are co-emitted; this is in particular the case for BC and OC from {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} burning aerosols. The net RF of biomass burning emissions for aerosol–radiation interactions is close to zero, but with rather strong positive RF from BC and negative RF from OC (see Sections {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4 8.3.4} and {Chapters.7.7_5 7.5}). The ERF due to aerosol–cloud interactions is caused by primary anthropogenic emissions of BC, OC and dust as well as secondary aerosol from anthropogenic emissions of SO2, NOX and NH3. However, quantification of the contribution from the various components to the ERF due to aerosol–cloud interactions has not been attempted in this assessment.
