index: hide
name: Acute and Chronic Diseases

The duration of the period of illness can vary greatly, depending on the pathogen, effectiveness of the immune response in the host, and any medical treatment received. For an  **acute disease**, pathologic changes occur over a relatively short time (e.g., hours, days, or a few weeks) and involve a rapid onset of disease conditions. For example,  **influenza** (caused by Influenzavirus) is considered an acute disease because the incubation period is approximately 1–2 days. Infected individuals can spread influenza to others for approximately 5 days after becoming ill. After approximately 1 week, individuals enter the period of decline.

For a  **chronic disease**, pathologic changes can occur over longer time spans (e.g., months, years, or a lifetime). For example, chronic  **gastritis** (inflammation of the lining of the stomach) is caused by the gram-negative bacterium  **Helicobacter pylori**.  *H. pylori* is able to colonize the stomach and persist in its highly acidic environment by producing the enzyme urease, which modifies the local acidity, allowing the bacteria to survive indefinitely. Consequently,  *H. pylori* infections can recur indefinitely unless the infection is cleared using antibiotics. **Hepatitis B virus** can cause a chronic infection in some patients who do not eliminate the virus after the acute illness. A chronic infection with hepatitis B virus is characterized by the continued production of infectious virus for 6 months or longer after the acute infection, as measured by the presence of viral antigen in blood samples.

In  **latent disease** **s**, as opposed to chronic infections, the causal pathogen goes dormant for extended periods of time with no active replication. Examples of diseases that go into a latent state after the acute infection include  **herpes** (herpes simplex viruses [HSV-1 and HSV-2]),  **chickenpox** ( **varicella-zoster virus** [VZV]), and  **mononucleosis** ( **Epstein-Barr virus** [EBV]). HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV evade the host immune system by residing in a latent form within cells of the nervous system for long periods of time, but they can reactivate to become active infections during times of stress and immunosuppression. For example, an initial infection by VZV may result in a case of childhood chickenpox, followed by a long period of latency. The virus may reactivate decades later, causing episodes of shingles in adulthood. EBV goes into latency in B cells of the immune system and possibly epithelial cells; it can reactivate years later to produce B-cell lymphoma.
