index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.2.1.3
title: 9.2.1.3 - Instrument Simulators

Satellites provide nearly global coverage, sampling across many meteorological conditions. This makes them powerful tools for model evaluation. The conventional approach has been to convert satellite-observed radiation information to ‘model-equivalents’ ({cite.9.'Stephens_and_Kummerow_2007}), and these have been used in numerous studies ({cite.9.'Allan_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Gleckler_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Li_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Pincus_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Waliser_et_al_2009b}; {cite.9.'Li_et_al_2011a}, 2012a; {cite.9.'Jiang_et_al_2012a}). A challenge is that limitations of the satellite sensors demand various assumptions in order to convert a satellite measurement into a ‘model equivalent’ climate variable.

An alternative approach is to calculate ‘observation-equivalents’ from models using radiative transfer calculations to simulate what the satellite would provide if the satellite system were ‘observing’ the model. This approach is usually referred to as an ‘instrument simulator’. Microphysical assumptions (which differ from model to model) can be included in the simulators, avoiding inconsistencies. A simulator for cloud properties from the International Cloud Satellite Climatology Project (ISCCP) ({cite.9.'Yu_et_al_1996}; {cite.9.'Klein_and_Jakob_1999}; {cite.9.'Webb_et_al_2001}) has been widely used for model evaluation since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} (Chen and Del Genio, 2009; {cite.9.'Marchand_et_al_2009}; {cite.9.'Wyant_et_al_2009}; {cite.9.'Yokohata_et_al_2010}), often in conjunction with statistical techniques to separate model clouds into cloud regimes (e.g., {cite.9.'Field_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Williams_and_Brooks_2008}; {cite.9.'Williams_and_Webb_2009}). New simulators for other satellite products have also been developed and are increasingly applied for model evaluation (Bodas-Salcedo et al., 2011). Although often focussed on clouds and precipitation, the simulator approach has also been used successfully for other variables such as upper tropospheric humidity ({cite.9.'Allan_et_al_2003}; {cite.9.'Iacono_et_al_2003}; {cite.9.'Ringer_et_al_2003}; {cite.9.'Brogniez_et_al_2005}; {cite.9.'Brogniez_and_Pierrehumbert_2007}; {cite.9.'Zhang_et_al_2008b}; Bodas-Salcedo et al., 2011). Although providing an alternative to the use of model-equivalents from observations, instrument simulators have limitations ({cite.9.'Pincus_et_al_2012}) and are best applied in combination with other model evaluation techniques.
