index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.3.2.2
title: 10.3.2.2 - Changes in Precipitation

Analysis of CMIP5 model simulations yields clear global and regional scale changes associated with {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forcing (e.g., {cite.10.'Scheff_and_Frierson_2012a}, 2012b), with patterns broadly similar to those identified from CMIP3 models (e.g., {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013}). The {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} concluded that ‘the latitudinal pattern of change in land precipitation and observed increases in heavy precipitation over the 20th century appear to be consistent with the anticipated response to anthropogenic forcing’. {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution Detection} and attribution of regional precipitation changes generally focuses on continental areas using in situ data because observational coverage over oceans is limited to a few island stations ({cite.10.'Arkin_et_al_2010}; {cite.10.'Liu_et_al_2012}; {cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012}) , although model-data comparisons over continents also illustrate large observational {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} ({cite.10.'Tapiador_2010}; {cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012}; Balan Sarojini et al., 2012; {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013}). Available satellite data sets that could supplement oceanic studies are short and their long-term homogeneity is still unclear ({Chapters.2 Chapter 2}); hence they have not yet been used for detection and attribution of changes. Continuing uncertainties in {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} simulations of precipitation make quantitative model/data comparisons difficult (e.g., {cite.10.'Stephens_et_al_2010}), which also limits confidence in detection and attribution. Furthermore, sparse observational coverage of precipitation across much of the planet makes the {Glossary.*Fingerprint fingerprint} of precipitation change challenging to isolate in observational records (Balan Sarojini et al., 2012; {cite.10.'Wan_et_al_2013}).

Considering just land regions with sufficient observations, the largest signal of differences between models with and without {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings} is in the high latitudes of the NH, where increases in precipitation are a robust feature of climate model simulations ({cite.10.'Scheff_and_Frierson_2012a}, 2012b). Such increases have been observed ({'Figure_10_10 Figure 10.10}) in several different observational data sets ({cite.10.'Min_et_al_2008a}; {cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012}; {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013}), although high-latitude trends vary between data sets and with coverage (e.g., {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013}).

{image:'Figure_10_10}

Attribution of zonally averaged precipitation trends has been attempted using different observational products and ensembles of forced simulations from both the CMIP3 and CMIP5 archives, for annual-averaged ({cite.10.'Zhang_et_al_2007}; {cite.10.'Min_et_al_2008a}) and season-specific ({cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012}; {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013}) results ({'Figure_10_11 Figure 10.11}). {cite.10.'Zhang_et_al_2007 Zhang et al. (2007)} identify the fingerprint of anthropogenic changes in observed annual zonal mean precipitation averaged over the periods 1925–1999 and 1950–1999, and separate the anthropogenic fingerprint from the influence of natural forcing. The fingerprint of {Glossary.*External_forcing external forcing} is also detected in seasonal means for boreal spring in all data sets assessed by {cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012 Noake et al. (2012)}, and in all but one data set assessed by {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013 Polson et al. (2013)} ({'Figure_10_11 Figure 10.11}), and in boreal winter in all but one data set ({cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012}), over the period 1951–1999 and to 2005. The fingerprint features increasing high-latitude precipitation, and decreasing precipitation trends in parts of the tropics that are reasonably robustly observed in all four data sets considered albeit with large observational uncertainties north of 60°N ({'Figure_10_11 Figure 10.11}). Detection of seasonal-average precipitation change is less convincing for June, July, August (JJA) and September, October, November (SON) and results vary with observation data set ({cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012}; {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013}). Although {cite.10.'Zhang_et_al_2007 Zhang et al. (2007)} detect anthropogenic changes even if a separate fingerprint for natural forcings is considered, {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013 Polson et al. (2013)} find that this result is sensitive to the data set used and that the fingerprints can be separated robustly only for the data set most closely constrained by station data. The analysis also finds that model simulated precipitation variability is smaller than observed variability in the tropics ({cite.10.'Zhang_et_al_2007}; {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013}) which is addressed by increasing the estimate of variance from models ({'Figure_10_11 Figure 10.11}).

{image:'Figure_10_11}

Another detection and attribution study focussed on precipitation in the NH high latitudes and found an attributable {Topics.*Human_Influence human influence} ({cite.10.'Min_et_al_2008a}). Both {cite.10.'Min_et_al_2008a Min et al. (2008a)} and {cite.10.'Zhang_et_al_2007 Zhang et al. (2007)} find that the observed changes are significantly larger than the model simulated changes. However, {cite.10.'Noake_et_al_2012 Noake et al. (2012)} and {cite.10.'Polson_et_al_2013 Polson et al. (2013)} find that the difference between models and observations decreases if changes are expressed as a percentage of climatological precipitation and that the observed and simulated changes are largely consistent between CMIP5 models and observations given data uncertainty. Use of additional data sets illustrates remaining observational uncertainty in high latitudes of the NH ({'Figure_10_11 Figure 10.11}). Regional-scale attribution of precipitation change is still problematic although {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} models have yielded simulations consistent with observed wintertime changes for northern Europe (Bhend and von Storch, 2008; {cite.10.'Tapiador_2010}).

Precipitation change over ocean has been {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to human influence by {cite.10.'Fyfe_et_al_2012 Fyfe et al. (2012)} for the high-latitude SH in austral summer, where zonally averaged precipitation has declined around 45°S and increased around 60°S since 1957, consistent with CMIP5 historical simulations, with the magnitude of the half-century {Glossary.*Trend trend} outside the range of simulated natural variability. Confidence in this attribution result, despite limitations in precipitation observations, is enhanced by its consistency with trends in large-scale {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} pressure data (see {Chapters.10.10_3.10_3_3 Section 10.3.3}).

In summary, there is medium confidence that human influence has contributed to large-scale changes in precipitation patterns over land. The expected anthropogenic fingerprints of change in zonal mean precipitation—reductions in low latitudes and increases in NH mid to high latitudes—have been detected in annual and some seasonal data. Observational uncertainties including limited global coverage and large natural variability, in addition to challenges in precipitation modeling, limit confidence in assessment of climatic changes in precipitation.
