index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.4.3
title: 9.4.3 - Sea Ice

Evaluation of sea ice performance requires accurate information on ice concentration, thickness, velocity, salinity, snow cover and other factors. The most reliably measured characteristic of sea ice remains sea ice extent (usually understood as the area covered by ice with a concentration above 15%). Caveats, however, exist related to the uneven reliability of different sources of sea ice extent estimates (e.g., satellite vs. pre-satellite observations; see {Chapters.4 Chapter 4}), as well as to limitations of this characteristic as a {Glossary.*Metric metric} of model performance ({cite.9.'Notz_et_al_2013}).

The CMIP5 multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} exhibits improvements over CMIP3 in simulation of sea ice extent in the both hemispheres ({'Figure_9_22 Figure 9.22}). In the Arctic, the multi-model mean error do not exceed 10% of the observationally based estimates for any given month. In the Antarctic, the corresponding multi-model mean error exceeds 10% (but is less than 20%) near the annual minimum of sea ice extent; around the annual maximum, the CMIP5 multi-model mean shows a clear improvement over CMIP3.

{image:'Figure_9_22}

In many models the regional distribution of sea ice concentration is poorly simulated, even if the hemispheric extent is approximately correct. In {'Figure_9_23 Figure 9.23}, however, one can see that the median ice edge position (indicated by the colour at which half of the models have ice of 15% concentration) agrees reasonably well with observations in both hemispheres (except austral summer in Antarctica), as was the case for the CMIP3 models.

{image:'Figure_9_23}

A widely discussed feature of the CMIP3 models as a group is a pronounced underestimation of the {Glossary.*Trend trend} in the September (annual minimum) sea ice extent in the Arctic over the past several decades (e.g., {cite.9.'Stroeve_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Zhang_2010}; {cite.9.'Rampal_et_al_2011}; {cite.9.'Winton_2011}). Possible reasons for the discrepancy include variability inherent to high latitudes, model shortcomings, and observational {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} (e.g., {cite.9.'Kattsov_et_al_2010}; {cite.9.'Kay_et_al_2011}; {cite.9.'Day_et_al_2012}). Compared to CMIP3, the CMIP5 models better simulate the observed trend of September Arctic ice extent ({'Figure_9_24 Figure 9.24}). It has been suggested ({cite.9.'Stroeve_et_al_2012}) that in some cases model improvements, such as new sea ice {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} {Glossary.*Parameterization parameterization} schemes (e.g., {cite.9.'Pedersen_et_al_2009}; {cite.9.'Holland_et_al_2012}), have been responsible. ({cite.9.'Holland_et_al_2010}) show that models with initially thicker ice generally retain more extensive ice throughout the 21st century, and indeed several of the CMIP5 models start the 20th century with rather thin winter ice cover promoting more rapid melt ({cite.9.'Stroeve_et_al_2012}). {cite.9.'Notz_et_al_2013 Notz et al. (2013)} caution, however, against direct comparison of modelled trends with observations unless the models’ {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} is carefully taken into account. Their analysis of the MPI-{Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESM} ensemble shows that internal variability in the Arctic can result in individual model realizations exhibiting a range of trends (negative, or even positive) for the 29-year-long period starting in 1979, even if the background climate is warming. According to the distribution of sea ice extent trends over the period 1979–2010 obtained in an ensemble of simulations with individual CMIP5 models ({'Figure_9_24 Figure 9.24}) about one quarter of the simulations shows a September trend in the Arctic as strong as, or stronger, than in observations.

{image:'Figure_9_24}

The majority of CMIP5 (and CMIP3) models exhibit a decreasing trend in SH austral summer sea ice extent over the satellite era, in contrast to the observed weak but significant increase (see {Chapters.4 Chapter 4}). A large spread in the modelled trends is present, and a comparison of multiple ensemble members from the same model suggests large internal variability during the late 20th century and the first decade of the 21st century (e.g., {cite.9.'Landrum_et_al_2012}; {cite.9.'Zunz_et_al_2013}). Compared to observations, CMIP5 models strongly overestimate the variability of sea ice extent, at least in austral winter ({cite.9.'Zunz_et_al_2013}).Therefore, using the models to assess the potential role of the internal variability in the trend of sea ice extent in the Southern Ocean over the last three decades presents a significant challenge.

{Glossary.*Sea_ice Sea ice} is a product of {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}–ocean interaction. There are a number of ways in which sea ice is influenced by and interacts with the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} and ocean, and some of these feedbacks are still poorly quantified. As noted in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, among the primary causes of biases in simulated sea ice extent, especially its geographical distribution, are problems with simulating high-latitude winds, ocean heat {Glossary.*Advection advection} and mixing. For example, {cite.9.'Koldunov_et_al_2010 Koldunov et al. (2010)} have shown, for a particular CMIP3 model, that significant ice thickness errors originate from biases in the atmospheric component. Similarly, {cite.9.'Melsom_et_al_2009 Melsom et al. (2009)} note sea ice improvements associated with improved description of heat transport by ocean currents. Biases imparted on modelled sea ice, common to many models, may also be related to representation of high-latitude processes (e.g., polar clouds) or processes not yet commonly included in models (e.g., deposition of carbonaceous aerosols on snow and ice). Some CMIP5 models show improvements in simulation of sea ice that are connected to improvements in simulation of the atmosphere (e.g., {cite.9.'Notz_et_al_2013}).
