index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * A  **mutation** is a heritable change in DNA. A mutation may lead to a change in the amino-acid sequence of a protein, possibly affecting its function.
  * A  **point mutation** affects a single base pair. A point mutation may cause a  **silent mutation** if the mRNA codon codes for the same amino acid, a  **missense mutation** if the mRNA codon codes for a different amino acid, or a  **nonsense mutation** if the mRNA codon becomes a stop codon.
  * Missense mutations may retain function, depending on the chemistry of the new amino acid and its location in the protein. Nonsense mutations produce truncated and frequently nonfunctional proteins.
  * A  **frameshift mutation** results from an insertion or deletion of a number of nucleotides that is not a multiple of three. The change in reading frame alters every amino acid after the point of the mutation and results in a nonfunctional protein.
  *  **Spontaneous mutations** occur through DNA replication errors, whereas  **induced mutations** occur through exposure to a  **mutagen**.
  * Mutagenic agents are frequently carcinogenic but not always. However, nearly all carcinogens are mutagenic.
  * Chemical mutagens include base analogs and chemicals that modify existing bases. In both cases, mutations are introduced after several rounds of DNA replication.
  *  **Ionizing radiation,** such as X-rays and γ-rays, leads to breakage of the phosphodiester backbone of DNA and can also chemically modify bases to alter their base-pairing rules.
  *  **Nonionizing radiation** like ultraviolet light may introduce pyrimidine (thymine) dimers, which, during DNA replication and transcription, may introduce frameshift or point mutations.
  * Cells have mechanisms to repair naturally occurring mutations. DNA polymerase has proofreading activity. Mismatch repair is a process to repair incorrectly incorporated bases after DNA replication has been completed.
  * Pyrimidine dimers can also be repaired. In  **nucleotide excision repair (dark repair)**, enzymes recognize the distortion introduced by the pyrimidine dimer and replace the damaged strand with the correct bases, using the undamaged DNA strand as a template. Bacteria and other organisms may also use  **direct repair**, in which the photolyase enzyme, in the presence of visible light, breaks apart the pyrimidines.
  * Through comparison of growth on the complete plate and lack of growth on media lacking specific nutrients, specific loss-of-function mutants called  **auxotrophs** can be identified.
  * The  **Ames test** is an inexpensive method that uses auxotrophic bacteria to measure mutagenicity of a chemical compound. Mutagenicity is an indicator of carcinogenic potential.
