index: hide
name: The Nucleus

Typically, the nucleus is the most prominent organelle in a cell ( ). The  **nucleus** (plural = nuclei) houses the cell’s DNA and directs the synthesis of ribosomes and proteins. Let’s look at it in more detail ( {'Figure_4_3_4 Figure 4.3.4}).


{image:'Figure_4_3_4}
        

## The Nuclear Envelope

The  **nuclear envelope** is a double-membrane structure that constitutes the outermost portion of the nucleus ( {'Figure_4_3_4 Figure 4.3.4}). Both the inner and outer membranes of the nuclear envelope are phospholipid bilayers.

The nuclear envelope is punctuated with pores that control the passage of ions, molecules, and RNA between the nucleoplasm and cytoplasm. The  **nucleoplasm** is the semi-solid fluid inside the nucleus, where we find the chromatin and the nucleolus.

## Chromatin and Chromosomes

To understand chromatin, it is helpful to first consider chromosomes.  **Chromosomes** are structures within the nucleus that are made up of DNA, the hereditary material. You may remember that in prokaryotes, DNA is organized into a single circular chromosome. In eukaryotes, chromosomes are linear structures. Every eukaryotic species has a specific number of chromosomes in the nuclei of its body’s cells. For example, in humans, the chromosome number is 46, while in fruit flies, it is eight.
Chromosomes are only visible and distinguishable from one another when the cell is getting ready to divide. When the cell is in the growth and maintenance phases of its life cycle, proteins are attached to chromosomes, and they resemble an unwound, jumbled bunch of threads. These unwound protein-chromosome complexes are called  **chromatin** ( {'Figure_4_3_5b Figure 4.3.5b}); chromatin describes the material that makes up the chromosomes both when condensed and decondensed.


{image:'Figure_4_3_5b}
        
{image:'Figure_4_3_5a}
        

## The Nucleolus

We already know that the nucleus directs the synthesis of ribosomes, but how does it do this? Some chromosomes have sections of DNA that encode ribosomal RNA. A darkly staining area within the nucleus called the  **nucleolus** (plural = nucleoli) aggregates the ribosomal RNA with associated proteins to assemble the ribosomal subunits that are then transported out through the pores in the nuclear envelope to the cytoplasm.
