index: hide
name: Fluid Compartments

Body fluids can be discussed in terms of their specific  **fluid compartment**, a location that is largely separate from another compartment by some form of a physical barrier. The  **intracellular fluid (ICF)** compartment is the system that includes all fluid enclosed in cells by their  plasma membranes.  **Extracellular fluid (ECF)** surrounds all cells in the body. Extracellular fluid has two primary constituents: the fluid component of the blood (called plasma) and the  **interstitial fluid (IF)** that surrounds all cells not in the blood ({'Figure_27_1_2 Figure 27.1.2}).


{image:'Figure_27_1_2}
        

## Intracellular Fluid

The ICF lies within cells and is the principal component of the cytosol/cytoplasm. The ICF makes up about 60 percent of the total water in the human body, and in an average-size adult male, the ICF accounts for about 25 liters (seven gallons) of fluid ({'Figure_27_1_3 Figure 27.1.3}). This fluid volume tends to be very stable, because the amount of water in living cells is closely regulated. If the amount of water inside a cell falls to a value that is too low, the cytosol becomes too concentrated with solutes to carry on normal cellular activities; if too much water enters a cell, the cell may burst and be destroyed.


{image:'Figure_27_1_3}
        

## Extracellular Fluid

The ECF accounts for the other one-third of the body’s water content. Approximately 20 percent of the ECF is found in plasma. Plasma travels through the body in blood vessels and transports a range of materials, including blood cells, proteins (including clotting factors and antibodies), electrolytes, nutrients, gases, and wastes. Gases, nutrients, and waste materials travel between capillaries and cells through the IF. Cells are separated from the IF by a selectively permeable cell membrane that helps regulate the passage of materials between the IF and the interior of the cell.

The body has other water-based ECF. These include the cerebrospinal fluid that bathes the brain and spinal cord, lymph, the synovial fluid in joints, the pleural fluid in the pleural cavities, the pericardial fluid in the cardiac sac, the peritoneal fluid in the peritoneal cavity, and the aqueous humor of the eye. Because these fluids are outside of cells, these fluids are also considered components of the ECF compartment.
