index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Bacterial meningitis** can be caused by several species of encapsulated bacteria, including  *Haemophilus influenzae*,  *Neisseria meningitidis*,  *Streptococcus pneumoniae*, and  *Streptococcus agalactiae* (group B streptococci).  *H. influenzae* affects primarily young children and neonates,  *N. meningitidis* is the only communicable pathogen and mostly affects children and young adults,  *S. pneumoniae* affects mostly young children, and  *S. agalactiae* affects newborns during or shortly after birth.
  * Symptoms of bacterial meningitis include fever, neck stiffness, headache, confusion, convulsions, coma, and death.
  * Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is made through observations and culture of organisms in CSF. Bacterial meningitis is treated with antibiotics.  *H. influenzae* and  *N. meningitidis* have vaccines available.
  *  *Clostridium* species cause neurological diseases, including  **botulism** and  **tetanus**, by producing potent neurotoxins that interfere with neurotransmitter release. The PNS is typically affected. Treatment of  *Clostridium* infection is effective only through early diagnosis with administration of antibiotics to control the infection and antitoxins to neutralize the endotoxin before they enter cells.
  *  *Listeria monocytogenes* is a foodborne pathogen that can infect the CNS, causing meningitis. The infection can be spread through the placenta to a fetus. Diagnosis is through culture of blood or CSF. Treatment is with antibiotics and there is no vaccine.
  *  **Hansen’s disease** ( **leprosy**) is caused by the intracellular parasite  *Mycobacterium leprae*. Infections cause demylenation of neurons, resulting in decreased sensation in peripheral appendages and body sites. Treatment is with multi-drug antibiotic therapy, and there is no universally recognized vaccine.
