index: hide
name: Clostridium-Associated Diseases

#  *Clostridium*-Associated Diseases

Species in the genus  **Clostridium** are gram-positive, endospore-forming rods that are obligate anaerobes. Endospores of  *Clostridium* spp. are widespread in nature, commonly found in soil, water, feces, sewage, and marine sediments.  *Clostridium* spp. produce more types of protein exotoxins than any other bacterial genus, including two exotoxins with protease activity that are the most potent known biological toxins:  **botulinum neurotoxin** (BoNT) and  **tetanus neurotoxin** (TeNT). These two toxins have lethal doses of 0.2–10 ng per kg body weight.

BoNT can be produced by unique strains of  *C. butyricum*, and  *C. baratii*; however, it is primarily associated with  *C. botulinum* and the condition of botulism. TeNT, which causes tetanus, is only produced by  *C. tetani*. These powerful neural exotoxins are the primary virulence factors for these pathogens. The mode of action for these toxins was described in <link:> and illustrated in {'Figure_15_3_Neurotoxin Figure 15.3.Neurotoxin}.

Diagnosis of tetanus or botulism typically involves bioassays that detect the presence of BoNT and TeNT in fecal specimens, blood (serum), or suspect foods. In addition, both  *C. botulinum* and  *C. tetani* can be isolated and cultured using commercially available media for anaerobes. ELISA and RT-PCR tests are also available.

## Tetanus

 **Tetanus** is a noncommunicable disease characterized by uncontrollable muscle spasms (contractions) caused by the action of TeNT. It generally occurs when  *C. tetani* infects a wound and produces TeNT, which rapidly binds to neural tissue, resulting in an intoxication (poisoning) of neurons. Depending on the site and extent of infection, cases of tetanus can be described as localized, cephalic, or generalized. Generalized tetanus that occurs in a newborn is called neonatal tetanus.

Localized tetanus occurs when TeNT only affects the muscle groups close to the injury site. There is no CNS involvement, and the symptoms are usually mild, with localized muscle spasms caused by a dysfunction in the surrounding neurons. Individuals with partial immunity—especially previously vaccinated individuals who neglect to get the recommended booster shots—are most likely to develop localized tetanus as a result of  *C. tetani* infecting a puncture wound.

Cephalic tetanus is a rare, localized form of tetanus generally associated with wounds on the head or face. In rare cases, it has occurred in cases of otitis media (middle ear infection). Cephalic tetanus often results in patients seeing double images, because of the spasms affecting the muscles that control eye movement.

Both localized and cephalic tetanus may progress to generalized tetanus—a much more serious condition—if TeNT is able to spread further into body tissues. In generalized tetanus, TeNT enters neurons of the PNS. From there, TeNT travels from the site of the wound, usually on an extremity of the body, retrograde (back up) to inhibitory neurons in the CNS. There, it prevents the release of  **gamma aminobutyric acid** (GABA), the neurotransmitter responsible for muscle relaxation. The resulting muscle spasms often first occur in the jaw muscles, leading to the characteristic symptom of  **lockjaw** (inability to open the mouth). As the toxin progressively continues to block neurotransmitter release, other muscles become involved, resulting in uncontrollable, sudden muscle spasms that are powerful enough to cause tendons to rupture and bones to fracture. Spasms in the muscles in the neck, back, and legs may cause the body to form a rigid, stiff arch, a posture called  **opisthotonos** ({'Figure_26_2_tetanus Figure 26.2.tetanus}). Spasms in the larynx, diaphragm, and muscles of the chest restrict the patient’s ability to swallow and breathe, eventually leading to death by asphyxiation (insufficient supply of oxygen).

 **Neonatal tetanus** typically occurs when the stump of the umbilical cord is contaminated with spores of  *C. tetani* after delivery. Although this condition is rare in the United States, neonatal tetanus is a major cause of infant mortality in countries that lack maternal immunization for tetanus and where birth often occurs in unsanitary conditions. At the end of the first week of life, infected infants become irritable, feed poorly, and develop rigidity with spasms. Neonatal tetanus has a very poor prognosis with a mortality rate of 70%–100%.

Treatment for patients with tetanus includes assisted breathing through the use of a ventilator, wound debridement, fluid balance, and antibiotic therapy with metronidazole or penicillin to halt the growth of  *C. tetani*. In addition, patients are treated with  **TeNT antitoxin**, preferably in the form of human immunoglobulin to neutralize nonfixed toxin and benzodiazepines to enhance the effect of GABA for muscle relaxation and anxiety.

A  **tetanus toxoid (TT) vaccine** is available for protection and prevention of tetanus. It is the T component of vaccines such as DTaP, Tdap, and Td. The CDC recommends children receive doses of the DTaP vaccine at 2, 4, 6, and 15–18 months of age and another at 4–6 years of age. One dose of Td is recommended for adolescents and adults as a TT booster every 10 years.


{image:'Figure_26_2_tetanus}
        

## Botulism

 **Botulism** is a rare but frequently fatal illness caused by intoxication by  **BoNT**. It can occur either as the result of an infection by  *C. botulinum*, in which case the bacteria produce BoNT  *in vivo*, or as the result of a direct introduction of BoNT into tissues.

Infection and production of BoNT  *in vivo* can result in  **wound botulism**, infant botulism, and adult intestinal toxemia. Wound botulism typically occurs when  *C. botulinum* is introduced directly into a wound after a traumatic injury, deep puncture wound, or injection site. Infant botulism, which occurs in infants younger than 1 year of age, and adult intestinal toxemia, which occurs in immunocompromised adults, results from ingesting  *C. botulinum* endospores in food. The endospores germinate in the body, resulting in the production of BoNT in the intestinal tract.

Intoxications occur when BoNT is produced outside the body and then introduced directly into the body through food ( **foodborne botulism**), air ( **inhalation botulism**), or a clinical procedure ( **iatrogenic botulism**). Foodborne botulism, the most common of these forms, occurs when BoNT is produced in contaminated food and then ingested along with the food (recall ). Inhalation botulism is rare because BoNT is unstable as an aerosol and does not occur in nature; however, it can be produced in the laboratory and was used (unsuccessfully) as a bioweapon by terrorists in Japan in the 1990s. A few cases of accidental inhalation botulism have also occurred. Iatrogenic botulism is also rare; it is associated with injections of BoNT used for cosmetic purposes (see ).

When BoNT enters the bloodstream in the gastrointestinal tract, wound, or lungs, it is transferred to the neuromuscular junctions of motor neurons where it binds irreversibly to presynaptic membranes and prevents the release of  **acetylcholine** from the presynaptic terminal of motor neurons into the neuromuscular junction. The consequence of preventing acetylcholine release is the loss of muscle activity, leading to muscle relaxation and eventually paralysis.

If BoNT is absorbed through the gastrointestinal tract, early symptoms of botulism include blurred vision, drooping eyelids, difficulty swallowing, abdominal cramps, nausea, vomiting, constipation, or possibly diarrhea. This is followed by progressive  **flaccid paralysis**, a gradual weakening and loss of control over the muscles. A patient’s experience can be particularly terrifying, because hearing remains normal, consciousness is not lost, and he or she is fully aware of the progression of his or her condition. In infants, notable signs of botulism include weak cry, decreased ability to suckle, and hypotonia (limpness of head or body). Eventually, botulism ends in death from respiratory failure caused by the progressive paralysis of the muscles of the upper airway, diaphragm, and chest.

Botulism is treated with an  **antitoxin** specific for BoNT. If administered in time, the antitoxin stops the progression of paralysis but does not reverse it. Once the antitoxin has been administered, the patient will slowly regain neurological function, but this may take several weeks or months, depending on the severity of the case. During recovery, patients generally must remain hospitalized and receive breathing assistance through a ventilator.

## Listeriosis

 **Listeria monocytogenes** is a nonencapsulated, nonsporulating, gram-positive rod and a foodborne pathogen that causes  **listeriosis**. At-risk groups include pregnant women, neonates, the elderly, and the immunocompromised (recall the Clinical Focus case studies in  and ). Listeriosis leads to meningitis in about 20% of cases, particularly neonates and patients over the age of 60. The CDC identifies listeriosis as the third leading cause of death due to foodborne illness, with overall mortality rates reaching 16%. In pregnant women, listeriosis can cause also cause spontaneous abortion in pregnant women because of the pathogen’s unique ability to cross the placenta.

 *L. monocytogenes* is generally introduced into food items by contamination with soil or animal manure used as fertilizer. Foods commonly associated with listeriosis include fresh fruits and vegetables, frozen vegetables, processed meats, soft cheeses, and raw milk. Unlike most other foodborne pathogens,  *Listeria* is able to grow at temperatures between 0 °C and 50 °C, and can therefore continue to grow, even in refrigerated foods.

Ingestion of contaminated food leads initially to infection of the gastrointestinal tract. However,  *L. monocytogenes* produces several unique virulence factors that allow it to cross the intestinal barrier and spread to other body systems. Surface proteins called  **internalins** (InlA and InlB) help  *L. monocytogenes* invade nonphagocytic cells and tissues, penetrating the intestinal wall and becoming disseminating through the circulatory and lymphatic systems. Internalins also enable  *L. monocytogenes* to breach other important barriers, including the  **blood-brain barrier** and the placenta. Within tissues,  *L. monocytogenes* uses other proteins called  **listeriolysin O** and  **ActA** to facilitate intercellular movement, allowing the infection to spread from cell to cell ({'Figure_26_2_Listeria Figure 26.2.Listeria}).

 *L. monocytogenes* is usually identified by cultivation of samples from a normally sterile site (e.g., blood or  **CSF**). Recovery of viable organisms can be enhanced using cold enrichment by incubating samples in a broth at 4 °C for a week or more. Distinguishing types and subtypes of  *L. monocytogenes*—an important step for diagnosis and epidemiology—is typically done using pulsed-field gel electrophoresis. Identification can also be achieved using chemiluminescence DNA probe assays and MALDI-TOF.

Treatment for listeriosis involves antibiotic therapy, most commonly with  **ampicillin** and  **gentamicin**. There is no vaccine available.


{image:'Figure_26_2_Listeria}
        
