index: hide
name: Bacterial Meningitis

 **Bacterial meningitis** is one of the most serious forms of meningitis. Bacteria that cause meningitis often gain access to the CNS through the bloodstream after trauma or as a result of the action of bacterial toxins. Bacteria may also spread from structures in the upper respiratory tract, such as the oropharynx, nasopharynx, sinuses, and middle ear. Patients with head wounds or cochlear implants (an electronic device placed in the inner ear) are also at risk for developing meningitis.

Many of the bacteria that can cause  **meningitis** are commonly found in healthy people. The most common causes of non-neonatal bacterial meningitis are  **Neisseria meningitidis**,  **Streptococcus pneumoniae**, and  **Haemophilus influenzae**. All three of these bacterial pathogens are spread from person to person by respiratory secretions. Each can colonize and cross through the mucous membranes of the oropharynx and nasopharynx, and enter the blood. Once in the blood, these pathogens can disseminate throughout the body and are capable of both establishing an infection and triggering inflammation in any body site, including the meninges ({'Figure_26_2_Brains Figure 26.2.Brains}). Without appropriate systemic antibacterial therapy, the case-fatality rate can be as high as 70%, and 20% of those survivors may be left with irreversible nerve damage or tissue destruction, resulting in hearing loss, neurologic disability, or loss of a limb. Mortality rates are much lower (as low as 15%) in populations where appropriate therapeutic drugs and preventive vaccines are available.


{image:'Figure_26_2_Brains}
        

A variety of other bacteria, including  **Listeria monocytogenes** and  **Escherichia coli**, are also capable of causing meningitis. These bacteria cause infections of the arachnoid mater and CSF after spreading through the circulation in blood or by spreading from an infection of the sinuses or nasopharynx.  **Streptococcus agalactiae**, commonly found in the microbiota of the vagina and gastrointestinal tract, can also cause bacterial meningitis in newborns after transmission from the mother either before or during birth.

The profound inflammation caused by these microbes can result in early symptoms that include severe headache, fever, confusion, nausea, vomiting, photophobia, and stiff neck. Systemic inflammatory responses associated with some types of bacterial meningitis can lead to hemorrhaging and purpuric lesions on skin, followed by even more severe conditions that include shock, convulsions, coma, and death—in some cases, in the span of just a few hours.

Diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is best confirmed by analysis of CSF obtained by a  **lumbar puncture**. Abnormal levels of  **polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs)** (> 10 PMNs/mm<sup>3</sup>), glucose (< 45 mg/dL), and protein (> 45 mg/dL) in the CSF are suggestive of bacterial meningitis. Characteristics of specific forms of bacterial meningitis are detailed in the subsections that follow.

## Meningococcal Meningitis

 **Meningococcal meningitis** is a serious infection caused by the gram-negative coccus  *N. meningitidis*. In some cases, death can occur within a few hours of the onset of symptoms. Nonfatal cases can result in irreversible nerve damage, resulting in hearing loss and brain damage, or amputation of extremities because of tissue necrosis.

Meningococcal meningitis can infect people of any age, but its prevalence is highest among infants, adolescents, and young adults. Meningococcal meningitis was once the most common cause of meningitis epidemics in human populations. This is still the case in a swath of sub-Saharan Africa known as the  **meningitis belt**, but meningococcal meningitis epidemics have become rare in most other regions, thanks to meningococcal vaccines. However, outbreaks can still occur in communities, schools, colleges, prisons, and other populations where people are in close direct contact.

 *N. meningitidis* has a high affinity for mucosal membranes in the oropharynx and nasopharynx. Contact with respiratory secretions containing  *N. meningitidis* is an effective mode of transmission. The pathogenicity of  *N. meningitidis* is enhanced by  **virulence factors** that contribute to the rapid progression of the disease. These include  **lipooligosaccharide (LOS) endotoxin**,  **type IV pili** for attachment to host tissues, and  **polysaccharide capsules** that help the cells avoid phagocytosis and complement-mediated killing. Additional virulence factors include  **IgA protease** (which breaks down IgA antibodies), the  **invasion factors** Opa, Opc, and porin (which facilitate transcellular entry through the  **blood-brain barrier**),  **iron-uptake factors** (which strip heme units from hemoglobin in host cells and use them for growth), and  **stress proteins** that protect bacteria from reactive oxygen molecules.

A unique sign of meningococcal meningitis is the formation of a  **petechial rash** on the skin or mucous membranes, characterized by tiny, red, flat, hemorrhagic lesions. This rash, which appears soon after disease onset, is a response to LOS endotoxin and adherence virulence factors that disrupt the endothelial cells of capillaries and small veins in the skin. The blood vessel disruption triggers the formation of tiny blood clots, causing blood to leak into the surrounding tissue. As the infection progresses, the levels of virulence factors increase, and the hemorrhagic lesions can increase in size as blood continues to leak into tissues. Lesions larger than 1.0 cm usually occur in patients developing shock, as virulence factors cause increased hemorrhage and clot formation. Sepsis, as a result of systemic damage from meningococcal virulence factors, can lead to rapid multiple organ failure, shock, disseminated intravascular coagulation, and death.

Because meningococcoal meningitis progresses so rapidly, a greater variety of clinical specimens are required for the timely detection of  *N. meningitidis*. Required specimens can include blood, CSF, naso- and oropharyngeal swabs, urethral and endocervical swabs, petechial aspirates, and biopsies. Safety protocols for handling and transport of specimens suspected of containing  *N. meningitidis* should always be followed, since cases of fatal meningococcal disease have occurred in healthcare workers exposed to droplets or aerosols from patient specimens. Prompt presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis can occur when CSF is directly evaluated by Gram stain, revealing extra- and intracellular gram-negative diplococci with a distinctive coffee-bean microscopic morphology associated with  **PMNs** ({'Figure_26_2_Meningococ Figure 26.2.Meningococ}). Identification can also be made directly from CSF using latex agglutination and immunochromatographic rapid diagnostic tests specific for  *N. meningitidis*. Species identification can also be performed using DNA sequence-based typing schemes for hypervariable outer membrane proteins of  *N. meningitidis*, which has replaced sero(sub)typing.

Meningococcal infections can be treated with antibiotic therapy, and third-generation  **cephalosporins** are most often employed. However, because outcomes can be negative even with treatment, preventive vaccination is the best form of treatment. In 2010, countries in Africa’s  **meningitis belt** began using a new serogroup A meningococcal conjugate vaccine. This program has dramatically reduced the number of cases of meningococcal meningitis by conferring individual and herd immunity.

Twelve different  **capsular serotypes** of  *N. meningitidis* are known to exist. Serotypes A, B, C, W, X, and Y are the most prevalent worldwide. The CDC recommends that children between 11–12 years of age be vaccinated with a single dose of a quadrivalent vaccine that protects against serotypes A, C, W, and Y, with a booster at age 16. An additional booster or injections of serogroup B meningococcal vaccine may be given to individuals in high-risk settings (such as epidemic outbreaks on college campuses).


{image:'Figure_26_2_Meningococ}
        

## Pneumococcal Meningitis

 **Pneumococcal meningitis** is caused by the encapsulated gram-positive bacterium  *S. pneumoniae* (pneumococcus, also called strep pneumo). This organism is commonly found in the  **microbiota** of the pharynx of 30–70% of young children, depending on the sampling method, while  *S. pneumoniae* can be found in fewer than 5% of healthy adults. Although it is often present without disease symptoms, this microbe can cross the  **blood-brain barrier** in susceptible individuals. In some cases, it may also result in septicemia. Since the introduction of the  **Hib vaccine**,  *S. pneumoniae* has become the leading cause of meningitis in humans aged 2 months through adulthood.

 *S. pneumoniae* can be identified in  **CSF** samples using gram-stained specimens, latex agglutination, and  **immunochromatographic RDT** specific for  *S. pneumoniae*. In gram-stained samples,  *S. pneumoniae* appears as gram-positive,  **lancet-shaped diplococci** ({'Figure_26_2_Pneumococc Figure 26.2.Pneumococc}). Identification of  *S. pneumoniae* can also be achieved using cultures of CSF and blood, and at least 93 distinct serotypes can be identified based on the  **quellung reaction** to unique capsular polysaccharides. PCR and RT-PCR assays are also available to confirm identification.

Major  **virulence factors** produced by  *S. pneumoniae* include  **PI-1 pilin** for adherence to host cells (pneumococcal adherence) and  **virulence factor B** (PavB) for attachment to cells of the respiratory tract;  **choline-binding proteins** (cbpA) that bind to epithelial cells and interfere with immune factors IgA and C3; and the cytoplasmic bacterial toxin  **pneumolysin** that triggers an inflammatory response.

With the emergence of drug-resistant strains of  *S. pneumoniae*, pneumococcal meningitis is typically treated with broad-spectrum antibiotics, such as  **levofloxacin**,  **cefotaxime**,  **penicillin**, or other  **β-lactam** antibiotics. The two available  **pneumococcal vaccines** are described in <link:>.


{image:'Figure_26_2_Pneumococc}
        

##  *Haemophilus influenzae* Type b

 **Meningitis due to H. influenzae serotype b** (Hib), an encapsulated pleomorphic gram-negative coccobacilli, is now uncommon in most countries, because of the use of the effective  **Hib vaccine**. Without the use of the Hib vaccine,  *H. influenzae* can be the primary cause of meningitis in children 2 months thru 5 years of age.  *H. influenzae* can be found in the throats of healthy individuals, including infants and young children. By five years of age, most children have developed immunity to this microbe. Infants older than 2 months of age, however, do not produce a sufficient protective antibody response and are susceptible to serious disease. The intracranial pressure caused by this infection leads to a 5% mortality rate and 20% incidence of deafness or brain damage in survivors.

 *H. influenzae* produces at least 16 different virulence factors, including  **LOS**, which triggers inflammation, and  *Haemophilus* adhesion and penetration factor (Hap), which aids in attachment and invasion into respiratory epithelial cells. The bacterium also has a polysaccharide capsule that helps it avoid phagocytosis, as well as factors such as  **IgA1 protease** and  **P2 protein** that allow it to evade antibodies secreted from mucous membranes. In addition, factors such as  **hemoglobin-binding protein (Hgp)** and  **transferrin-binding protein (Tbp)** acquire iron from hemoglobin and transferrin, respectively, for bacterial growth.

Preliminary diagnosis of  *H. influenzae* infections can be made by direct PCR and a smear of  **CSF**. Stained smears will reveal intracellular and extracellular PMNs with small, pleomorphic, gram-negative coccobacilli or filamentous forms that are characteristic of  *H. influenzae*. Initial confirmation of this genus can be based on its fastidious growth on chocolate agar. Identification is confirmed with requirements for exogenous biochemical growth cofactors NAD and heme (by MALDI-TOF), latex agglutination, and RT-PCR.

Meningitis caused by  *H. influenzae* is usually treated with  **doxycycline**,  **fluoroquinolones**, second- and third-generation  **cephalosporins**, and  **carbapenems**. The best means of preventing  *H. influenza* infection is with the use of the  **Hib polysaccharide conjugate vaccine**. It is recommended that all children receive this vaccine at 2, 4, and 6 months of age, with a final booster dose at 12 to 15 months of age.

## Neonatal Meningitis

 *S. agalactiae*,  **Group B streptococcus (GBS)**, is an encapsulated gram-positive bacterium that is the most common cause of  **neonatal meningitis**, a term that refers to meningitis occurring in babies up to 3 months of age. *S. agalactiae* can also cause meningitis in people of all ages and can be found in the urogenital and gastrointestinal  **microbiota** of about 10–30% of humans.

Neonatal infection occurs as either early onset or late-onset disease. Early onset disease is defined as occurring in infants up to 7 days old. The infant initially becomes infected by  *S. agalactiae* during childbirth, when the bacteria may be transferred from the mother’s vagina. Incidence of early onset neonatal meningitis can be greatly reduced by giving intravenous antibiotics to the mother during labor.

Late-onset neonatal meningitis occurs in infants between 1 week and 3 months of age. Infants born to mothers with  *S. agalactiae* in the urogenital tract have a higher risk of late-onset menigitis, but late-onset infections can be transmitted from sources other than the mother; often, the source of infection is unknown. Infants who are born prematurely (before 37 weeks of pregnancy) or to mothers who develop a fever also have a greater risk of contracting late-onset neonatal meningitis.

Signs and symptoms of early onset disease include temperature instability,  **apnea** (cessation of breathing),  **bradycardia** (slow heart rate),  **hypotension**, difficulty feeding, irritability, and limpness. When asleep, the baby may be difficult to wake up. Symptoms of late-onset disease are more likely to include seizures, bulging fontanel (soft spot), stiff neck,  **hemiparesis** (weakness on one side of the body), and  **opisthotonos** (rigid body with arched back and head thrown backward).

 *S. agalactiae* produces at least 12 virulence factors that include FbsA that attaches to host cell surface proteins,  **PI-1 pili** that promotes the invasion of human endothelial cells, a polysaccharide capsule that prevents the activation of the alternative complement pathway and inhibits phagocytosis, and the toxin  **CAMP factor**, which forms pores in host cell membranes and binds to IgG and IgM antibodies.

Diagnosis of neonatal meningitis is often, but not uniformly, confirmed by positive results from cultures of  **CSF** or blood. Tests include routine culture, antigen detection by enzyme immunoassay, serotyping of different capsule types, PCR, and RT-PCR. It is typically treated with β-lactam antibiotics such as intravenous  **penicillin** or  **ampicillin** plus  **gentamicin**. Even with treatment, roughly 10% mortality is seen in infected neonates.
