index: hide
name: Classification Features of Animals

Animals are classified according to morphological and developmental characteristics, such as a body plan. With the exception of sponges, the animal body plan is symmetrical. This means that their distribution of body parts is balanced along an axis. Additional characteristics that contribute to animal classification include the number of tissue layers formed during development, the presence or absence of an internal body cavity, and other features of embryological development.

## Body Symmetry

Animals may be asymmetrical, radial, or bilateral in form ({'Figure_15_1_3 Figure 15.1.3}).  **Asymmetrical** animals are animals with no pattern or symmetry; an example of an asymmetrical animal is a sponge ({'Figure_15_1_3 Figure 15.1.3} **a**). An organism with  **radial symmetry** ({'Figure_15_1_3 Figure 15.1.3} **b**) has a longitudinal (up-and-down) orientation: Any plane cut along this up–down axis produces roughly mirror-image halves. An example of an organism with radial symmetry is a sea anemone.


{image:'Figure_15_1_3}
        

 **Bilateral symmetry** is illustrated in {'Figure_15_1_3 Figure 15.1.3} **c** using a goat. The goat also has upper and lower sides to it, but they are not symmetrical. A vertical plane cut from front to back separates the animal into roughly mirror-image right and left sides. Animals with bilateral symmetry also have a “head” and “tail” (anterior versus posterior) and a back and underside (dorsal versus ventral).

## Layers of Tissues

Most animal species undergo a layering of early tissues during embryonic development. These layers are called  **germ layers**. Each layer develops into a specific set of tissues and organs. Animals develop either two or three embryonic germs layers ({'Figure_15_1_4 Figure 15.1.4}). The animals that display radial symmetry develop two germ layers, an inner layer (endoderm) and an outer layer (ectoderm). These animals are called  **diploblasts**. Animals with bilateral symmetry develop three germ layers: an inner layer (endoderm), an outer layer (ectoderm), and a middle layer (mesoderm). Animals with three germ layers are called  **triploblasts**.


{image:'Figure_15_1_4}
        

## Presence or Absence of a Coelom

Triploblasts may develop an internal body cavity derived from mesoderm, called a  **coelom** (pr. see-LŌM). This epithelial-lined cavity is a space, usually filled with fluid, which lies between the digestive system and the body wall. It houses organs such as the kidneys and spleen, and contains the circulatory system. Triploblasts that do not develop a coelom are called  **acoelomates**, and their mesoderm region is completely filled with tissue, although they have a gut cavity. Examples of acoelomates include the flatworms. Animals with a true coelom are called  **eucoelomates** (or coelomates) ({'Figure_15_1_5 Figure 15.1.5}). A true coelom arises entirely within the mesoderm germ layer. Animals such as earthworms, snails, insects, starfish, and vertebrates are all eucoelomates. A third group of triploblasts has a body cavity that is derived partly from mesoderm and partly from endoderm tissue. These animals are called  **pseudocoelomates**. Roundworms are examples of pseudocoelomates. New data on the relationships of pseudocoelomates suggest that these phyla are not closely related and so the evolution of the pseudocoelom must have occurred more than once (). True coelomates can be further characterized based on features of their early embryological development.


{image:'Figure_15_1_5}
        

## Protostomes and Deuterostomes

Bilaterally symmetrical, triploblastic eucoelomates can be divided into two groups based on differences in their early embryonic development.  **Protostomes** include phyla such as arthropods, mollusks, and annelids.  **Deuterostomes** include the chordates and echinoderms. These two groups are named from which opening of the digestive cavity develops first: mouth or anus. The word  *protostome* comes from Greek words meaning “mouth first,” and  *deuterostome* originates from words meaning “mouth second” (in this case, the anus develops first). This difference reflects the fate of a structure called the blastopore ({'Figure_15_1_6 Figure 15.1.6}), which becomes the mouth in protostomes and the anus in deuterostomes. Other developmental characteristics differ between protostomes and deuterostomes, including the mode of formation of the coelom and the early cell division of the embryo.


{image:'Figure_15_1_6}
        
