index: hide
name: Invertebrate Chordates

In addition to the vertebrates, the phylum Chordata contains two clades of invertebrates:  **Urochordata** (tunicates) and  **Cephalochordata** (lancelets). Members of these groups possess the four distinctive features of chordates at some point during their development.

The  **tunicates** ({'Figure_15_5_4abc Figure 15.5.4abc}) are also called sea squirts. The name tunicate derives from the cellulose-like carbohydrate material, called the tunic, which covers the outer body. Although tunicates are classified as chordates, the adult forms are much modified in body plan and do not have a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, or a post-anal tail, although they do have pharyngeal slits. The larval form possesses all four structures. Most tunicates are hermaphrodites. Tunicate larvae hatch from eggs inside the adult tunicate’s body. After hatching, a tunicate larva swims for a few days until it finds a suitable surface on which it can attach, usually in a dark or shaded location. It then attaches by the head to the substrate and undergoes metamorphosis into the adult form, at which point the notochord, nerve cord, and tail disappear.


{image:'Figure_15_5_4abc}
        

Most tunicates live a sessile existence in shallow ocean waters and are suspension feeders. The primary foods of tunicates are plankton and detritus. Seawater enters the tunicate’s body through its incurrent siphon. Suspended material is filtered out of this water by a mucus net (pharyngeal slits) and is passed into the intestine through the action of cilia. The anus empties into the excurrent siphon, which expels wastes and water.

 **Lancelets** possess a notochord, dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a post-anal tail in the adult stage ({'Figure_15_5_5 Figure 15.5.5}). The notochord extends into the head, which gives the subphylum its name (Cephalochordata). Extinct fossils of this subphylum date to the middle of the Cambrian period (540–488 mya).The living forms, the lancelets, are named for their blade-like shape. Lancelets are only a few centimeters long and are usually found buried in sand at the bottom of warm temperate and tropical seas. Like tunicates, they are suspension feeders.


{image:'Figure_15_5_5}
        
