index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.6.1
title: 12.4.6.1 - Changes in Sea Ice Cover

Based on the analysis of CMIP3 climate change simulations (e.g., {cite.12.'Arzel_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Zhang_and_Walsh_2006}), the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} concludes that the Arctic and Antarctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} covers are projected to shrink in the 21st century under all SRES {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}, with a large range of model responses ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}). It also stresses that, in some {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}, the Arctic Ocean becomes almost entirely ice-free in late summer during the second half of the 21st century. These conclusions were confirmed by further analyses of the CMIP3 archives (e.g., {cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Bracegirdle_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Lefebvre_and_Goosse_2008}; Boé et al., 2009b; Sen Gupta et al., 2009; {cite.12.'Wang_and_Overland_2009}; {cite.12.'Zhang_2010b}; {cite.12.'NRC_2011}; Körper et al., 2013). Figures {'Figure_12_28 12.28} and {'Figure_12_29 12.29} and the studies of {cite.12.'Maksym_et_al_2012 Maksym et al. (2012)}, {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012 Massonnet et al. (2012)}, {cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2012 Stroeve et al. (2012)} and {cite.12.'Wang_and_Overland_2012 Wang and Overland (2012)} show that the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs}/{Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} as a group also project decreases in sea ice extent through the end of this century in both hemispheres under all {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs}. However, as in the case of CMIP3, the inter-{Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} is considerable.

In the NH, in accordance with CMIP3 results, the absolute rate of decrease of the CMIP5 multi-model mean sea ice areal coverage is greatest in September. The reduction in sea ice extent between the time periods 1986–2005 and 2081–2100 for the CMIP5 multi-model average ranges from 8% for {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} to 34% for {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} in February and from 43% for RCP2.6 to 94% for RCP8.5 in September. Medium confidence is attached to these values as projections of sea ice extent decline in the real world due to errors in the simulation of present-day sea ice extent (mean and trends—see {Chapters.9.9_4.9_4_3 Section 9.4.3}) and because of the large spread of model responses. About 90% of the available CMIP5 models reach nearly ice-free conditions (sea ice extent less than 1 × 106 km2 for at least 5 consecutive years) during September in the Arctic before 2100 under RCP8.5 (about 45% under RCP4.5). By the end of the 21st century, the decrease in multi-model mean sea ice volume ranges from 29% for RCP2.6 to 73% for RCP8.5 in February and from 54% for RCP2.6 to 96% for RCP8.5 in September. Medium confidence is attached to these values as projections of the real world sea ice volume. In February, these percentages are much higher than the corresponding ones for sea ice extent, which is indicative of a substantial sea ice thinning.

A frequent criticism of the CMIP3 models is that, as a group, they strongly underestimate the rapid decline in summer Arctic sea ice extent observed during the past few decades (e.g., {cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Winton_2011}), which suggests that the CMIP3 projections of summer Arctic sea ice areal coverage might be too conservative. As shown in {Chapters.9.9_4.9_4_3 Section 9.4.3} and {'Figure_12_28 Figure 12.28}b, the magnitude of the CMIP5 multi-model mean {Glossary.*Trend trend} in September Arctic sea ice extent over the satellite era is more consistent with, but still underestimates, the observed one (see also {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Wang_and_Overland_2012}; {cite.12.'Overland_and_Wang_2013}). Owing to the shortness of the observational record, it is difficult to ascertain the relative influence of natural variability on this trend. This hinders the comparison between modelled and observed trends, and hence the estimate of the sensitivity of the September Arctic sea ice extent to global {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} change (i.e., the decrease in sea ice extent per degree global warming) ({cite.12.'Kay_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Winton_2011}; {cite.12.'Mahlstein_and_Knutti_2012}). This sensitivity may be crucial for determining future sea ice losses. Indeed, a clear relationship exists at longer than decadal time scales in climate change simulations between the annual mean or September mean Arctic sea ice extent and the annual mean global {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} change for ice extents larger than ~1 × 106 km2 (e.g., {cite.12.'Ridley_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Zhang_2010b}; {cite.12.'NRC_2011}; {cite.12.'Winton_2011}; {cite.12.'Mahlstein_and_Knutti_2012}). This relationship is illustrated in {'Figure_12_30 Figure 12.30} for both CMIP3 and CMIP5 models. From this figure, it can be seen that the sea ice sensitivity varies significantly from model to model and is generally larger and in better agreement among models in CMIP5.

{image:'Figure_12_28}

{image:'Figure_12_29}

{image:'Figure_12_30}

A complete and detailed explanation for what controls the range of Arctic sea ice responses in models over the 21st century remains elusive, but the Arctic sea ice provides an example where process-based constraints can be used to reduce the spread of model projections ({cite.12.'Overland_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Collins_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Hodson_et_al_2012}). For CMIP3 models, results indicate that the changes in Arctic sea ice mass budget over the 21st century are related to the late 20th century mean sea ice thickness distribution ({cite.12.'Holland_et_al_2010}), average sea ice thickness ({cite.12.'Bitz_2008}; {cite.12.'Hodson_et_al_2012}), fraction of thin ice cover (Boé et al., 2009b) and oceanic heat transport to the Arctic ({cite.12.'Mahlstein_and_Knutti_2011}). For CMIP5 models, {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012 Massonnet et al. (2012)} showed that the time needed for the September Arctic sea ice areal coverage to drop below a certain threshold is highly correlated with the September sea ice extent and annual mean sea ice volume averaged over the past several decades ({'Figure_12_31 Figure 12.31}a, b). The timing of a seasonally ice-free Arctic Ocean or the fraction of remaining sea ice in September at any time during the 21st century were also found to correlate with the past trend in September Arctic sea ice extent and the amplitude of the mean seasonal cycle of sea ice extent (Boé et al., 2009b; {cite.12.'Collins_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012}) ({'Figure_12_31 Figure 12.31}c, d). All these empirical relationships can be understood on simple physical grounds (see the aforementioned references for details).

{image:'Figure_12_31}

These results lend support for weighting/recalibrating the models based on their present-day Arctic sea ice simulations. Today, the optimal approach for constraining sea ice projections from {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} is unclear, although one notes that these methods should have a credible underlying physical basis in order to increase confidence in their results (see {Chapters.12.12_2 Section 12.2}). In addition, they should account for the potentially large imprint of natural variability on both observations and model simulations when these two sources of information are to be compared (see {Chapters.9.9_8.9_8_3 Section 9.8.3}). This latter point is particularly critical if the past sea ice trend or sensitivity is used in performance metrics given the relatively short observational period ({cite.12.'Kay_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Overland_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Mahlstein_and_Knutti_2012}; {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2012}). A number of studies have applied such metrics to the CMIP3 and CMIP5 models. {cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2007 Stroeve et al. (2007)} and {cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2012 Stroeve et al. (2012)} rejected several CMIP3 and CMIP5 models, respectively, on the basis of their simulated late 20th century mean September Arctic sea ice extent. {cite.12.'Wang_and_Overland_2009 Wang and Overland (2009)} selected a subset of CMIP3 models (and {cite.12.'Wang_and_Overland_2012 Wang and Overland (2012)} did the same for the CMIP5 models) based on their fidelity to the observed mean seasonal cycle of Arctic sea ice extent in the late 20th century and then scaled the chosen models to the recently observed September sea ice extent. {cite.12.'Zhang_2010b Zhang (2010b)} retained a number of CMIP3 models based on the regression between summer sea ice loss and Arctic surface temperature change. Boé et al. (2009b) and {cite.12.'Mahlstein_and_Knutti_2012 Mahlstein and Knutti (2012)} did not perform a model selection but rather recalibrated the CMIP3 Arctic sea ice projections on available observations of September Arctic sea ice trend and sensitivity to global surface temperature change, respectively. Finally, {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012 Massonnet et al. (2012)} selected a subset of CMIP5 models on the basis of the four relationships illustrated in {'Figure_12_31 Figure 12.31}a–d.

These various methods all suggest a faster rate of summer Arctic sea ice decline than the multi-model mean. Although they individually provide a reduced range for the year of near disappearance of the September Arctic sea ice compared to the original CMIP3/CMIP5 multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}, they lead to different timings ({cite.12.'Overland_and_Wang_2013}). Consequently, the time interval obtained when combining all these studies remains wide: 2020–2100+ (2100+ = not before 2100) for the SRES A1B scenario and RCP4.5 ({cite.12.'Stroeve_et_al_2007}, 2012; Boé et al., 2009b; {cite.12.'Wang_and_Overland_2009}, 2012; {cite.12.'Zhang_2010b}; {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012}) and 2020–2060 for RCP8.5 ({cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Wang_and_Overland_2012}). The method proposed by {cite.12.'Massonnet_et_al_2012 Massonnet et al. (2012)} is applied here to the full set of models that provided the CMIP5 database with sea ice output. The natural variability of each of the four diagnostics shown in {'Figure_12_31 Figure 12.31}a–d is first estimated by averaging over all available models with more than one ensemble member the diagnostic standard deviations derived from the model ensemble members. Then, for each model, a ±2 standard deviation interval is constructed around the ensemble mean or single realization of the diagnostic considered. A model is retained if, for each diagnostic, either this interval overlaps a ±20% interval around the observed/reanalysed value of the diagnostic or at least one ensemble member from that model gives a value for the diagnostic that falls within ±20% of the observational/reanalysed data. The outcome is displayed in {'Figure_12_31 Figure 12.31}e for RCP8.5. Among the five selected models (ACCESS1.0, ACCESS1.3, GFDL-CM3, IPSL-CM5A-MR, MPI-ESM-MR), four project a nearly ice-free Arctic Ocean in September before 2050 (2080) for RCP8.5 (RCP4.5), the earliest and latest years of near disappearance of the sea ice pack being about 2040 and about 2060 (about 2040 and 2100+), respectively. It should be mentioned that {cite.12.'Maslowski_et_al_2012 Maslowski et al. (2012)} projected that it would take only until about 2016 to reach a nearly ice-free Arctic Ocean in summer, based on a linear extrapolation into the future of the recent sea ice volume trend from a hindcast simulation conducted with a regional model of the Arctic sea ice–ocean system. However, such an extrapolation approach is problematic as it ignores the negative feedbacks that can occur when the sea ice cover becomes thin (e.g., {cite.12.'Bitz_and_Roe_2004}; {cite.12.'Notz_2009}) and neglects the effect of year-to-year or longer-term variability ({cite.12.'Overland_and_Wang_2013}). {cite.12.'Mahlstein_and_Knutti_2012 Mahlstein and Knutti (2012)} encompassed the dependence of sea ice projections on the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} scenario by determining the annual mean global surface warming threshold for nearly ice-free conditions in September. Their best estimate of ~2°C above the present derived from both CMIP3 models and observations is consistent with the 1.6 to 2.1°C range (mean value: 1.9°C) obtained from the CMIP5 model subset shown in {'Figure_12_31 Figure 12.31}e (see also {'Figure_12_30 Figure 12.30}b). The reduction in September Arctic sea ice extent by the end of the 21st century, averaged over this subset of models, ranges from 56% for RCP2.6 to 100% for RCP8.5.

In light of all these results, it is very likely that the Arctic sea ice cover will continue to shrink and thin all year round during the 21st century as the annual mean global surface temperature rises. It is also likely that the Arctic Ocean will become nearly ice-free in September before the middle of the century for high GHG {Topics.*Emissions emissions} such as those corresponding to RCP8.5 (medium confidence). The potential {Glossary.*Irreversibility irreversibility} of the Arctic sea ice loss and the possibility of an abrupt transition toward an ice-free Arctic Ocean are discussed in {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_5.12_5_5_7 Section 12.5.5.7}.

In the SH, the decrease in sea ice extent between 1986–2005 and 2081–2100 projected by the CMIP5 models as a group varies from 16% for RCP2.6 to 67% for RCP8.5 in February and from 8% to 30% in September. In contrast with the NH, the absolute rate of decline is greatest in wintertime. {cite.12.'Eisenman_et_al_2011 Eisenman et al. (2011)} argue that this hemispheric asymmetry in the seasonality of sea ice loss is fundamentally related to the geometry of coastlines. For each forcing scenario, the relative changes in multi-model mean February and September Antarctic sea ice volumes by the end of the century are of the same order as the corresponding ones for sea ice extent. About 75% of the available CMIP5 models reach a nearly ice-free state in February within this century under RCP8.5 (about 60% under RCP4.5). For RCP8.5, only small portions of the Weddell and Ross Seas stay ice-covered in February during 2081–2100 in those models that do not project a seasonally ice-free Southern Ocean (see {'Figure_12_29 Figure 12.29}c). Nonetheless, there is low confidence in these Antarctic sea ice projections because of the wide range of model responses and the inability of almost all of the models to reproduce the mean seasonal cycle, interannual variability and overall increase of the Antarctic sea ice areal coverage observed during the satellite era (see {Chapters.9.9_4.9_4_3 Section 9.4.3}; {cite.12.'Maksym_et_al_2012}; {cite.12.'Turner_et_al_2013}; {cite.12.'Zunz_et_al_2013}).
