index: hide
name: Hornworts

The defining characteristic of the hornworts ( *Anthocerotophyta*) is the narrow, pipe-like sporophyte. Hornworts have colonized a variety of habitats on land, although they are never far from a source of moisture. The short, blue-green gametophyte is the dominant phase of the life cycle of a hornwort. The sporophytes emerge from the parent gametophyte and continue to grow throughout the life of the plant ({'Figure_25_3_4 Figure 25.3.4}).


{image:'Figure_25_3_4}
        

Stomata (air pores that can be opened and closed) appear in the hornworts and are abundant on the sporophyte. Photosynthetic cells in the thallus each contain a single chloroplast. Meristem cells at the base of the plant keep dividing and adding to the height of the sporophyte. This growth pattern is unique to the hornworts. Many hornworts establish symbiotic relationships with cyanobacteria that fix nitrogen from the environment.

The lifecycle of hornworts ({'Figure_25_3_5 Figure 25.3.5}) follows the general pattern of  *alternation of generations*. The gametophytes grow as flat thalli on the soil with embedded male and female gametangia. Flagellated sperm swim to the archegonia and fertilize eggs. The zygote develops into a long and slender sporophyte that eventually splits open down the side, releasing spores. Thin branched cells called pseudoelaters surround the spores and help propel them farther in the environment. The haploid spores germinate and give rise to the next generation of gametophytes.


{image:'Figure_25_3_5}
        
