index: hide
name: Nematodes

The phylum  **Nematoda**, or roundworms, includes more than 28,000 species with an estimated 16,000 parasitic species. The name Nematoda is derived from the Greek word “nemos,” which means “thread.” Nematodes are present in all habitats and are extremely common, although they are usually not visible ({'Figure_15_3_3ab Figure 15.3.3ab}).


{image:'Figure_15_3_3ab}
        

Most nematodes look similar to each other: slender tubes, tapered at each end ({'Figure_15_3_3ab Figure 15.3.3ab}). Nematodes are pseudocoelomates and have a  **complete digestive system** with a distinct mouth and anus.

The nematode body is encased in a cuticle, a flexible but tough exoskeleton, or external skeleton, which offers protection and support. The cuticle contains a carbohydrate-protein polymer called  **chitin**. The cuticle also lines the pharynx and rectum. Although the exoskeleton provides protection, it restricts growth, and therefore must be continually shed and replaced as the animal increases in size.

A nematode’s mouth opens at the anterior end with three or six lips and, in some species, teeth in the form of cuticular extensions. There may also be a sharp stylet that can protrude from the mouth to stab prey or pierce plant or animal cells. The mouth leads to a muscular pharynx and intestine, leading to the rectum and anal opening at the posterior end.

## Physiological Processes of Nematodes

In nematodes, the excretory system is not specialized. Nitrogenous wastes are removed by diffusion. In marine nematodes, regulation of water and salt is achieved by specialized glands that remove unwanted ions while maintaining internal body fluid concentrations.

Most nematodes have four nerve cords that run along the length of the body on the top, bottom, and sides. The nerve cords fuse in a ring around the pharynx, to form a head ganglion or “brain” of the worm, as well as at the posterior end to form the tail ganglion. Beneath the epidermis lies a layer of longitudinal muscles that permits only side-to-side, wave-like undulation of the body.

Nematodes employ a diversity of sexual reproductive strategies depending on the species; they may be monoecious,  **dioecious** (separate sexes), or may reproduce asexually by parthenogenesis.  *Caenorhabditis elegans* is nearly unique among animals in having both self-fertilizing hermaphrodites and  a male sex that can mate with the hermaphrodite.
