index: hide
name: Major Histocompatibility Complex Molecules

The  **major histocompatibility complex** ( **MHC**) is a collection of genes coding for MHC molecules found on the surface of all nucleated cells of the body. In humans, the MHC genes are also referred to as  **human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes**. Mature  **red blood cells**, which lack a nucleus, are the only cells that do not express MHC molecules on their surface.

There are two classes of MHC molecules involved in adaptive immunity, MHC I and MHC II ({'Figure_18_2_MHCbind Figure 18.2.MHCbind}).  **MHC I** molecules are found on all nucleated cells; they present normal  **self-antigens** as well as abnormal or nonself pathogens to the effector T cells involved in cellular immunity. In contrast,  **MHC II** molecules are only found on  **macrophages**,  **dendritic cells**, and  **B cells**; they present abnormal or nonself pathogen antigens for the initial activation of T cells.

Both types of MHC molecules are transmembrane glycoproteins that assemble as dimers in the cytoplasmic membrane of cells, but their structures are quite different. MHC I molecules are composed of a longer α protein chain coupled with a smaller  **β2 microglobulin** protein, and only the α chain spans the cytoplasmic membrane. The α chain of the MHC I molecule folds into three separate domains: α<sub>1</sub>, α<sub>2</sub> and α<sub>3</sub>. MHC II molecules are composed of two protein chains (an α and a β chain) that are approximately similar in length. Both chains of the MHC II molecule possess portions that span the plasma membrane, and each chain folds into two separate domains: α<sub>1</sub> and α<sub>2</sub>, and β<sub>1</sub>, and β<sub>2</sub>. In order to present abnormal or non-self-antigens to T cells, MHC molecules have a cleft that serves as the antigen-binding site near the “top” (or outermost) portion of the MHC-I or MHC-II dimer. For MHC I, the antigen-binding cleft is formed by the α<sub>1</sub> and α<sub>2</sub> domains, whereas for MHC II, the cleft is formed by the α<sub>1</sub> and β<sub>1</sub> domains ({'Figure_18_2_MHCbind Figure 18.2.MHCbind}).


{image:'Figure_18_2_MHCbind}
        
