index: hide
name: Properties of Life

All living organisms share several key characteristics or functions: order, sensitivity or response to the environment, reproduction, adaptation, growth and development, regulation, homeostasis, energy processing, and evolution. When viewed together, these nine characteristics serve to define life.

## Order


{image:'Figure_1_2_9}
        

Organisms are highly organized, coordinated structures that consist of one or more cells. Even very simple, single-celled organisms are remarkably complex: inside each cell, atoms comprise molecules. These in turn comprise cell organelles and other cellular inclusions. In multicellular organisms ({'Figure_1_2_9 Figure 1.2.9}), similar cells form tissues. Tissues, in turn, collaborate to create organs (body structures with a distinct function). Organs work together to form organ systems.

## Sensitivity or Response to Stimuli


{image:'Figure_1_2_10}
        

Organisms respond to diverse stimuli. For example, plants can bend toward a source of light, climb on fences and walls, or respond to touch ({'Figure_1_2_10 Figure 1.2.10}). Even tiny bacteria can move toward or away from chemicals (a process called  *chemotaxis*) or light ( *phototaxis*). Movement toward a stimulus is a positive response, while movement away from a stimulus is a negative response.

## Reproduction

Single-celled organisms reproduce by first duplicating their DNA, and then dividing it equally as the cell prepares to divide to form two new cells. Multicellular organisms often produce specialized reproductive germline, gamete, oocyte, and sperm cells. After fertilization (the fusion of an oocyte and a sperm cell), a new individual develops. When reproduction occurs, DNA containing genes are passed along to an organism’s offspring. These genes ensure that the offspring will belong to the same species and will have similar characteristics, such as size and shape.

## Growth and Development

Organisms grow and develop as a result of genes providing specific instructions that will direct cellular growth and development. This ensures that a species’ young ({'Figure_1_2_11 Figure 1.2.11}) will grow up to exhibit many of the same characteristics as its parents.


{image:'Figure_1_2_11}
        

## Regulation

Even the smallest organisms are complex and require multiple regulatory mechanisms to coordinate internal functions, respond to stimuli, and cope with environmental stresses. Two examples of internal functions regulated in an organism are nutrient transport and blood flow. Organs (groups of tissues working together) perform specific functions, such as carrying oxygen throughout the body, removing wastes, delivering nutrients to every cell, and cooling the body.

## Homeostasis


{image:'Figure_1_2_12}
        

In order to function properly, cells require appropriate conditions such as proper temperature, pH, and appropriate concentration of diverse chemicals. These conditions may, however, change from one moment to the next. Organisms are able to maintain internal conditions within a narrow range almost constantly, despite environmental changes, through  **homeostasis** (literally, “steady state”). For example, an organism needs to regulate body temperature through the thermoregulation process. Organisms that live in cold climates, such as the polar bear ({'Figure_1_2_12 Figure 1.2.12}), have body structures that help them withstand low temperatures and conserve body heat. Structures that aid in this type of insulation include fur, feathers, blubber, and fat. In hot climates, organisms have methods (such as perspiration in humans or panting in dogs) that help them to shed excess body heat.

## Energy Processing


{image:'Figure_1_2_13}
        

All organisms use a source of energy for their metabolic activities. Some organisms capture energy from the sun and convert it into chemical energy in food. Others use chemical energy in molecules they take in as food ({'Figure_1_2_13 Figure 1.2.13}).
