index: hide
name: Levels of Organization of Living Things

Living things are highly organized and structured, following a hierarchy that we can examine on a scale from small to large. The  **atom** is the smallest and most fundamental unit of matter. It consists of a nucleus surrounded by electrons. Atoms form molecules. A  **molecule** is a chemical structure consisting of at least two atoms held together by one or more chemical bonds. Many molecules that are biologically important are  **macromolecules**, large molecules that are typically formed by polymerization (a polymer is a large molecule that is made by combining smaller units called monomers, which are simpler than macromolecules). An example of a macromolecule is deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) ({'Figure_1_2_14 Figure 1.2.14}), which contains the instructions for the structure and functioning of all living organisms.


{image:'Figure_1_2_14}
        

Some cells contain aggregates of macromolecules surrounded by membranes. We call these  **organelles**. Organelles are small structures that exist within cells. Examples of organelles include mitochondria and chloroplasts, which carry out indispensable functions: mitochondria produce energy to power the cell, while chloroplasts enable green plants to utilize the energy in sunlight to make sugars. All living things are made of cells. The  **cell** itself is the smallest fundamental unit of structure and function in living organisms. (This requirement is why scientists do not consider viruses living: they are not made of cells. To make new viruses, they have to invade and hijack the reproductive mechanism of a living cell. Only then can they obtain the materials they need to reproduce.) Some organisms consist of a single cell and others are multicellular. Scientists classify cells as prokaryotic or eukaryotic.  **Prokaryotes** are single-celled or colonial organisms that do not have membrane-bound nuclei. In contrast, the cells of  **eukaryotes** do have membrane-bound organelles and a membrane-bound nucleus.

In larger organisms, cells combine to make  **tissues**, which are groups of similar cells carrying out similar or related functions.  **Organs** are collections of tissues grouped together performing a common function. Organs are present not only in animals but also in plants. An  **organ system** is a higher level of organization that consists of functionally related organs. Mammals have many organ systems. For instance, the circulatory system transports blood through the body and to and from the lungs. It includes organs such as the heart and blood vessels.  **Organisms** are individual living entities. For example, each tree in a forest is an organism. Single-celled prokaryotes and single-celled eukaryotes are also organisms, which biologists typically call microorganisms.

Biologists collectively call all the individuals of a species living within a specific area a  **population**. For example, a forest may include many pine trees, which represent the population of pine trees in this forest. Different populations may live in the same specific area. For example, the forest with the pine trees includes populations of flowering plants, insects, and microbial populations. A  **community** is the sum of populations inhabiting a particular area. For instance, all of the trees, flowers, insects, and other populations in a forest form the forest’s community. The forest itself is an ecosystem. An  **ecosystem** consists of all the living things in a particular area together with the abiotic, nonliving parts of that environment such as nitrogen in the soil or rain water. At the highest level of organization (), the  **biosphere** is the collection of all ecosystems, and it represents the zones of life on Earth. It includes land, water, and even the atmosphere to a certain extent.
