index: hide
name: 

 *Determine the appropriate test to be used  in the next three exercises.*

 *Use the following information to answer the next seven exercises:* Transit Railroads is interested in the relationship between travel distance and the ticket class purchased. A random sample of 200 passengers is taken.  shows the results. The railroad wants to know if a passenger’s choice in ticket class is independent of the distance they must travel.


| Traveling Distance | Third class | Second class | First class | Total |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 1–100 miles | 21 | 14 | 6 | 41 |
| 101–200 miles | 18 | 16 | 8 | 42 |
| 201–300 miles | 16 | 17 | 15 | 48 |
| 301–400 miles | 12 | 14 | 21 | 47 |
| 401–500 miles | 6 | 6 | 10 | 22 |
| Total | 73 | 67 | 60 | 200 |
    

 *Use the following information to answer the next eight exercises:* An article in the New England Journal of Medicine, discussed a study on smokers in California and Hawaii. In one part of the report, the self-reported ethnicity and smoking levels per day were given. Of the people smoking at most ten cigarettes per day, there were 9,886 African Americans, 2,745 Native Hawaiians, 12,831 Latinos, 8,378 Japanese Americans and 7,650 whites. Of the people smoking 11 to 20 cigarettes per day, there were 6,514 African Americans, 3,062 Native Hawaiians, 4,932 Latinos, 10,680 Japanese Americans, and 9,877 whites. Of the people smoking 21 to 30 cigarettes per day, there were 1,671 African Americans, 1,419 Native Hawaiians, 1,406 Latinos, 4,715 Japanese Americans, and 6,062 whites. Of the people smoking at least 31 cigarettes per day, there were 759 African Americans, 788 Native Hawaiians, 800 Latinos, 2,305 Japanese Americans, and 3,970 whites.

State the decision and conclusion (in a complete sentence) for the following preconceived levels of  *α*.
