index: hide
name: Epsilonproteobacteria

The smallest class of  **Proteobacteria** is  **Epsilonproteobacteria**, which are gram-negative microaerophilic bacteria (meaning they only require small amounts of oxygen in their environment). Two clinically relevant genera of Epsilonproteobacteria are  **Campylobacter** and  **Helicobacter**, both of which include human pathogens.  *Campylobacter* can cause food poisoning that manifests as severe enteritis (inflammation in the small intestine). This condition, caused by the species  *C. jejuni*, is rather common in developed countries, usually because of eating contaminated poultry products. Chickens often harbor  *C. jejuni* in their gastrointestinal tract and feces, and their meat can become contaminated during processing.

Within the genus  *Helicobacter,* the helical, flagellated bacterium  *H. pylori* has been identified as a beneficial member of the stomach microbiota, but it is also the most common cause of chronic gastritis and ulcers of the stomach and duodenum ({'Figure_4_2_Hpylori Figure 4.2.Hpylori}). Studies have also shown that  *H. pylori* is linked to stomach cancer. *H. pylori* is somewhat unusual in its ability to survive in the highly acidic environment of the stomach. It produces urease and other enzymes that modify its environment to make it less acidic.


{image:'Figure_4_2_Hpylori}
        

 summarizes the characteristics of the most clinically relevant genera of Epsilonproteobacteria.


****

| Example Genus | Microscopic Morphology | Unique Characteristics |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **Campylobacter** | Gram-negative, spiral-shaped rod | Aerobic (microaerophilic); often infects chickens; may infect humans via undercooked meat, causing severe enteritis |
|  **Helicobacter** | Gram-negative, spiral-shaped rod | Aerobic (microaerophilic) bacterium; can damage the inner lining of the stomach, causing chronic gastritis, peptic ulcers, and stomach cancer |
    
