index: hide
name: Deltaproteobacteria

The  **Deltaproteobacteria** is a small class of gram-negative  **Proteobacteria** that includes  **sulfate-reducing bacteria** (SRBs), so named because they use sulfate as the final electron acceptor in the electron transport chain. Few SRBs are pathogenic. However, the SRB  *Desulfovibrio orale* is associated with periodontal disease (disease of the gums).

Deltaproteobacteria also includes the genus  **Bdellovibrio**, species of which are parasites of other gram-negative bacteria.  *Bdellovibrio* invades the cells of the host bacterium, positioning itself in the periplasm, the space between the plasma membrane and the cell wall, feeding on the host’s proteins and polysaccharides. The infection is lethal for the host cells.

Another type of Deltaproteobacteria,  **myxobacteria**, lives in the soil, scavenging inorganic compounds. Motile and highly social, they interact with other bacteria within and outside their own group. They can form multicellular, macroscopic “ **fruiting bodies**” ({'Figure_4_2_Myxobac Figure 4.2.Myxobac}), structures that are still being studied by biologists and bacterial ecologists. These bacteria can also form metabolically inactive  **myxospores**.


{image:'Figure_4_2_Myxobac}
        

 summarizes the characteristics of several important genera of Deltaproteobacteria.


****

| Genus | Microscopic Morphology | Unique characteristics |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **Bdellovibrio** | Gram-negative, comma-shaped rod | Obligate aerobes; motile; parasitic (infecting other bacteria) |
|  **Desulfovibrio** (formerly  *Desufuromonas*) | Gram-negative, comma-shaped rod | Reduce sulfur; can be used for removal of toxic and radioactive waste |
|  **Myxobacterium** | Gram-negative, coccoid bacteria forming colonies (swarms) | Live in soil; can move by gliding; used as a model organism for studies of intercellular communication (signaling) |
    
