index: hide
name: Betaproteobacteria

Unlike Alphaproteobacteria, which survive on a minimal amount of nutrients, the class  **Betaproteobacteria** are  **eutroph**s (or copiotrophs), meaning that they require a copious amount of organic nutrients. Betaproteobacteria often grow between aerobic and anaerobic areas (e.g., in mammalian intestines). Some genera include species that are human pathogens, able to cause severe, sometimes life-threatening disease. The genus  **Neisseria**, for example, includes the bacteria  *N. gonorrhoeae,* the causative agent of the STI  **gonorrhea**, and  *N. meningitides*, the causative agent of  **bacterial meningitis**.

 *Neisseria* are cocci that live on mucosal surfaces of the human body. They are fastidious, or difficult to culture, and they require high levels of moisture, nutrient supplements, and carbon dioxide. Also,  *Neisseria* are microaerophilic, meaning that they require low levels of oxygen. For optimal growth and for the purposes of identification,  *Neisseria* spp. are grown on chocolate agar (i.e., agar supplemented by partially hemolyzed red blood cells). Their characteristic pattern of growth in culture is diplococcal: pairs of cells resembling coffee beans ({'Figure_4_2_Neisseria Figure 4.2.Neisseria}).


{image:'Figure_4_2_Neisseria}
        

The pathogen responsible for  **pertussis** ( **whooping cough**) is also a member of Betaproteobacteria. The bacterium  **Bordetella pertussis**, from the order  **Burkholderiales**, produces several toxins that paralyze the movement of cilia in the human respiratory tract and directly damage cells of the respiratory tract, causing a severe cough.

 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Betaproteobacteria.


****

| Example Genus | Microscopic Morphology | Unique Characteristics |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **Bordetella** | A small, gram-negative coccobacillus | Aerobic, very fastidious;  *B. pertussis* causes pertussis (whooping cough) |
|  **Burkholderia** | Gram-negative bacillus | Aerobic, aquatic, cause diseases in horses and humans (especially patients with cystic fibrosis); agents of nosocomial infections |
|  **Leptothrix** | Gram-negative, sheathed, filamentous bacillus | Aquatic; oxidize iron and manganese; can live in wastewater treatment plants and clog pipes |
|  **Neisseria** | Gram-negative, coffee bean-shaped coccus forming pairs | Require moisture and high concentration of carbon dioxide; oxidase positive, grow on chocolate agar; pathogenic species cause gonorrhea and meningitis |
|  **Thiobacillus** | Gram-negative bacillus | Thermophilic, acidophilic, strictly aerobic bacteria; oxidize iron and sulfur |
    
