index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Proteobacteria** is a phylum of gram-negative bacteria discovered by Carl Woese in the 1980s based on nucleotide sequence homology.
  * Proteobacteria are further classified into the classes alpha-, beta-, gamma-, delta- and epsilonproteobacteria, each class having separate orders, families, genera, and species.
  *  **Alphaproteobacteria** are  **oligotrophs**. The taxa chlamydias and rickettsias are  **obligate intracellular pathogens,** feeding on cells of host organisms; they are metabolically inactive outside of the host cell. Some Alphaproteobacteria can convert atmospheric nitrogen to nitrites, making nitrogen usable by other forms of life.
  *  **Betaproteobacteria** are  **eutrophs**. They include human pathogens of the genus  *Neisseria* and the species  *Bordetella pertussis*.
  *  **Gammaproteobacteria** are the largest and the most diverse group of Proteobacteria. Many are human pathogens that are aerobes or facultative anaerobes. Some Gammaproteobacteria are  **enteric** bacteria that may be coliform or noncoliform.  *Escherichia coli*, a member of Gammaproteobacteria, is perhaps the most studied bacterium.
  *  **Deltaproteobacteria** make up a small group able to reduce sulfate or elemental sulfur. Some are scavengers and form myxospores, with multicellular fruiting bodies.
  *  **Epsilonproteobacteria** make up the smallest group of Proteobacteria. The genera  *Campylobacter* and  *Helicobacter* are human pathogens.
