index: hide
name: Gammaproteobacteria

The most diverse class of  **gram-negative bacteria** is  **Gammaproteobacteria**, and it includes a number of human pathogens. For example, a large and diverse family,  *Pseudomonaceae*, includes the genus  **Pseudomonas**. Within this genus is the species  *P. aeruginosa*, a pathogen responsible for diverse infections in various regions of the body.  *P. aeruginosa* is a strictly aerobic, nonfermenting, highly motile bacterium. It often infects wounds and burns, can be the cause of chronic urinary tract infections, and can be an important cause of respiratory infections in patients with cystic fibrosis or patients on mechanical ventilators. Infections by  *P. aeruginosa* are often difficult to treat because the bacterium is resistant to many antibiotics and has a remarkable ability to form biofilms. Other representatives of  *Pseudomonas* include the fluorescent (glowing) bacterium  *P. fluorescens* and the soil bacteria  *P. putida*, which is known for its ability to degrade  **xenobiotics** (substances not naturally produced or found in living organisms).

The  **Pasteurellaceae** also includes several clinically relevant genera and species. This family includes several bacteria that are human and/or animal pathogens. For example,  *Pasteurella haemolytica* causes severe pneumonia in sheep and goats.  *P. multocida* is a species that can be transmitted from animals to humans through bites, causing infections of the skin and deeper tissues. The genus  **Haemophilus** contains two human pathogens,  *H. influenzae* and  *H. ducreyi*. Despite its name,  *H. influenzae* does not cause influenza (which is a viral disease).  *H. influenzae* can cause both upper and lower respiratory tract infections, including sinusitis, bronchitis, ear infections, and pneumonia. Before the development of effective vaccination, strains of  *H. influenzae* were a leading cause of more invasive diseases, like  **meningitis** in children.  *H. ducreyi* causes the STI known as  **chancroid**.

The order  **Vibrionales** includes the human pathogen  **Vibrio cholerae**. This comma-shaped aquatic bacterium thrives in highly alkaline environments like shallow lagoons and sea ports. A toxin produced by  *V. cholerae* causes hypersecretion of electrolytes and water in the large intestine, leading to profuse watery diarrhea and dehydration.  *V. parahaemolyticus* is also a cause of gastrointestinal disease in humans, whereas  *V. vulnificus* causes serious and potentially life-threatening cellulitis (infection of the skin and deeper tissues) and blood-borne infections. Another representative of Vibrionales,  *Aliivibrio fischeri*, engages in a symbiotic relationship with squid. The squid provides nutrients for the bacteria to grow and the bacteria produce  **bioluminescence** that protects the squid from predators ({'Figure_4_2_vibrionale Figure 4.2.vibrionale}).


{image:'Figure_4_2_vibrionale}
        

The genus  **Legionella** also belongs to the Gammaproteobacteria.  *L. pneumophila,* the pathogen responsible for  **Legionnaires disease**, is an aquatic bacterium that tends to inhabit pools of warm water, such as those found in the tanks of air conditioning units in large buildings ({'Figure_4_2_Legionella Figure 4.2.Legionella}). Because the bacteria can spread in aerosols, outbreaks of Legionnaires disease often affect residents of a building in which the water has become contaminated with  *Legionella.* In fact, these bacteria derive their name from the first known outbreak of Legionnaires disease, which occurred in a hotel hosting an American Legion veterans’ association convention in Philadelphia in 1976.


{image:'Figure_4_2_Legionella}
        

 **Enterobacteriaceae** is a large family of  **enteric** (intestinal) bacteria belonging to the  **Gammaproteobacteria**. They are facultative anaerobes and are able to ferment carbohydrates. Within this family, microbiologists recognize two distinct categories. The first category is called the coliforms, after its prototypical bacterium species,  **Escherichia coli**.  **Coliforms** are able to ferment lactose completely (i.e., with the production of acid and gas). The second category,  **noncoliforms**, either cannot ferment lactose or can only ferment it incompletely (producing either acid or gas, but not both). The noncoliforms include some notable human pathogens, such as  *Salmonella* spp *., Shigella* spp *.,* and  **Yersinia pestis**.

 *E. coli* has been perhaps the most studied bacterium since it was first described in 1886 by Theodor Escherich (1857–1911). Many strains of E. coli are in mutualistic relationships with humans. However, some strains produce a potentially deadly toxin called Shiga toxin. Shiga toxin is one of the most potent bacterial toxins identified. Upon entering target cells, Shiga toxin interacts with ribosomes, stopping protein synthesis. Lack of protein synthesis leads to cellular death and hemorrhagic colitis, characterized by inflammation of intestinal tract and bloody diarrhea. In the most severe cases, patients can develop a deadly hemolytic uremic syndrome. Other E. coli strains may cause traveler’s diarrhea, a less severe but very widespread disease.

The genus  **Salmonella**, which belongs to the noncoliform group of  *Enterobacteriaceae*, is interesting in that there is still no consensus about how many species it includes. Scientists have reclassified many of the groups they once thought to be species as  **serotypes** (also called  **serovars**), which are strains or variations of the same species of bacteria. Their classification is based on patterns of reactivity by animal antisera against molecules on the surface of the bacterial cells. A number of serotypes of  *Salmonella* can cause  **salmonellosis**, characterized by inflammation of the small and the large intestine, accompanied by fever, vomiting, and diarrhea. The species  *S. enterobacterica* (serovar  *typhi*) causes  **typhoid fever**, with symptoms including fever, abdominal pain, and skin rashes ({'Figure_4_2_Salmonella Figure 4.2.Salmonella}).


{image:'Figure_4_2_Salmonella}
        

 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Gammaproteobacteria.


****

| Example Genus | Microscopic Morphology | Unique Characteristics |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **Beggiatoa** | Gram-negative bacteria; disc-shaped or cylindrical | Aquatic, live in water with high content of hydrogen disulfide; can cause problems for sewage treatment |
|  **Enterobacter** | Gram-negative bacillus | Facultative anaerobe; cause urinary and respiratory tract infections in hospitalized patients; implicated in the pathogenesis of obesity |
|  **Erwinia** | Gram-negative bacillus | Plant pathogen causing leaf spots and discoloration; may digest cellulose; prefer relatively low temperatures (25–30 °C) |
|  **Escherichia** | Gram-negative bacillus | Facultative anaerobe; inhabit the gastrointestinal tract of warm-blooded animals; some strains are mutualists, producing vitamin K; others, like serotype  *E. coli* O157:H7, are pathogens;  *E. coli* has been a model organism for many studies in genetics and molecular biology |
|  **Hemophilus** | Gram-negative bacillus | Pleomorphic, may appear as coccobacillus, aerobe, or facultative anaerobe; grow on blood agar; pathogenic species can cause respiratory infections, chancroid, and other diseases |
|  **Klebsiella** | Gram-negative bacillus; appears rounder and thicker than other members of  *Enterobacteriaceae* | Facultative anaerobe, encapsulated, nonmotile; pathogenic species may cause pneumonia, especially in people with alcoholism |
|  **Legionella** | Gram-negative bacillus | Fastidious, grow on charcoal-buffered yeast extract;  *L. pneumophila* causes Legionnaires disease |
|  **Methylomonas** | Gram-negative bacillus | Use methane as source of carbon and energy |
|  **Proteus** | Gram-negative bacillus (pleomorphic) | Common inhabitants of the human gastrointestinal tract; motile; produce urease; opportunistic pathogens; may cause urinary tract infections and sepsis |
|  **Pseudomonas** | Gram-negative bacillus | Aerobic; versatile; produce yellow and blue pigments, making them appear green in culture; opportunistic, antibiotic-resistant pathogens may cause wound infections, hospital-acquired infections, and secondary infections in patients with cystic fibrosis |
|  **Serratia** | Gram-negative bacillus | Motile; may produce red pigment; opportunistic pathogens responsible for a large number of hospital-acquired infections |
|  **Shigella** | Gram-negative bacillus | Nonmotile; dangerously pathogenic; produce Shiga toxin, which can destroy cells of the gastrointestinal tract; can cause dysentery |
|  **Vibrio** | Gram-negative, comma- or curved rod-shaped bacteria | Inhabit seawater; flagellated, motile; may produce toxin that causes hypersecretion of water and electrolytes in the gastrointestinal tract; some species may cause serious wound infections |
|  **Yersinia** | Gram-negative bacillus | Carried by rodents; human pathogens;  *Y. pestis* causes bubonic plague and pneumonic plague;  *Y. enterocolitica* can be a pathogen causing diarrhea in humans |
    
