index: hide
name: Alphaproteobacteria

The first class of Proteobacteria is the  **Alphaproteobacteria**. The unifying characteristic of this class is that they are  **oligotroph**s, organisms capable of living in low-nutrient environments such as deep oceanic sediments, glacial ice, or deep undersurface soil.

Among the Alphaproteobacteria are two taxa, chlamydias and rickettsias, that are  **obligate intracellular pathogen**s, meaning that part of their life cycle must occur inside other cells called host cells. When not growing inside a host cell,  **Chlamydia** and  **Rickettsia** are metabolically inactive outside of the host cell. They cannot synthesize their own adenosine triphosphate (ATP), and, therefore, rely on cells for their energy needs.

 *Rickettsia* spp. include a number of serious human pathogens. For example,  **R. rickettsii** causes  **Rocky Mountain spotted fever**, a life-threatening form of meningoencephalitis (inflammation of the membranes that wrap the brain).  *R. rickettsii* infects ticks and can be transmitted to humans via a bite from an infected tick ({'Figure_4_2_RRicketsii Figure 4.2.RRicketsii}).


{image:'Figure_4_2_RRicketsii}
        

Another species of  *Rickettsia*,  *R.* *prowazekii*, is spread by lice. It causes  **epidemic typhus**, a severe infectious disease common during warfare and mass migrations of people.  *R. prowazekii* infects human endothelium cells, causing inflammation of the inner lining of blood vessels, high fever, abdominal pain, and sometimes delirium. A relative,  *R. typhi*, causes a less severe disease known as murine or endemic typhus, which is still observed in the southwestern United States during warm seasons.

 *Chlamydia* is another taxon of the Alphaproteobacteria. Members of this genus are gram-negative, obligate intracellular pathogens that are extremely resistant to the cellular defenses, giving them the ability to spread from host to host rapidly via elementary bodies. The metabolically and reproductively inactive  **elementary bodies** are the endospore-like form of intracellular bacteria that enter an epithelial cell, where they become active. {'Figure_4_2_Chlamydia Figure 4.2.Chlamydia} illustrates the life cycle of  *Chlamydia*.

 *C. trachomatis* is a human pathogen that causes  **trachoma**, a disease of the eyes, often leading to blindness.  *C. trachomatis* also causes the sexually transmitted disease  **lymphogranuloma venereum** (LGV). This disease is often mildly symptomatic, manifesting as regional lymph node swelling, or it may be asymptomatic, but it is extremely contagious and is common on college campuses.

 summarizes the characteristics of important genera of Alphaproteobacteria.


{image:'Figure_4_2_Chlamydia}
        


****

| Genus | Microscopic Morphology | Unique Characteristics |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
|  **Agrobacterium** | Gram-negative bacillus | Plant pathogen; one species,  *A. tumefaciens*, causes tumors in plants |
|  **Bartonella** | Gram-negative, pleomorphic, flagellated coccobacillus | Facultative intracellular bacteria, transmitted by lice and fleas, cause trench fever and cat scratch disease in humans |
|  **Brucella** | Gram-negative, small, flagellated coccobacillus | Facultative intracellular bacteria, transmitted by contaminated milk from infected cows, cause brucellosis in cattle and humans |
|  **Caulobacter** | Gram-negative bacillus | Used in studies on cellular adaptation and differentiation because of its peculiar life cycle (during cell division, forms “swarm” cells and “stalked” cells) |
|  **Chlamydia** | Gram-negative, coccoid or ovoid bacterium | Obligatory intracellular bacteria; some cause chlamydia, trachoma, and pneumonia |
|  **Coxiella** | Small, gram-negative bacillus | Obligatory intracellular bacteria; cause Q fever; potential for use as biological weapon |
|  **Ehrlichia** | Very small, gram-negative, coccoid or ovoid bacteria | Obligatory intracellular bacteria; can be transported from cell to cell; transmitted by ticks; cause ehrlichiosis (destruction of white blood cells and inflammation) in humans and dogs |
|  **Hyphomicrobium** | Gram-negative bacilli; grows from a stalk | Similar to  *Caulobacter* |
|  **Methylocystis** | Gram-negative, coccoid or short bacilli | Nitrogen-fixing aerobic bacteria |
|  **Rhizobium** | Gram-negative, rectangular bacilli with rounded ends forming clusters | Nitrogen-fixing bacteria that live in soil and form symbiotic relationship with roots of legumes (e.g., clover, alfalfa, and beans) |
|  **Rickettsia** | Gram-negative, highly pleomorphic bacteria (may be cocci, rods, or threads) | Obligate intracellular bacteria; transmitted by ticks; may cause Rocky Mountain spotted fever and typhus |
    
