index: hide
name: Synthesis and Release of Thyroid Hormones

Hormones are produced in the colloid when atoms of the mineral iodine attach to a glycoprotein, called thyroglobulin, that is secreted into the colloid by the follicle cells. The following steps outline the hormones’ assembly:

  1. Binding of TSH to its receptors in the follicle cells of the thyroid gland causes the cells to actively transport iodide ions (I<sup>–</sup>) across their cell membrane, from the bloodstream into the cytosol. As a result, the concentration of iodide ions “trapped” in the follicular cells is many times higher than the concentration in the bloodstream.
  2. Iodide ions then move to the lumen of the follicle cells that border the colloid. There, the ions undergo oxidation (their negatively charged electrons are removed). The oxidation of two iodide ions (2 I<sup>–</sup>) results in iodine (I<sub>2</sub>), which passes through the follicle cell membrane into the colloid.
  3. In the colloid, peroxidase enzymes link the iodine to the tyrosine amino acids in thyroglobulin to produce two intermediaries: a tyrosine attached to one iodine and a tyrosine attached to two iodines. When one of each of these intermediaries is linked by covalent bonds, the resulting compound is  **triiodothyronine** (T<sub>3</sub>), a thyroid hormone with three iodines. Much more commonly, two copies of the second intermediary bond, forming tetraiodothyronine, also known as  **thyroxine** (T<sub>4</sub>), a thyroid hormone with four iodines.

These hormones remain in the colloid center of the thyroid follicles until TSH stimulates endocytosis of colloid back into the follicle cells. There, lysosomal enzymes break apart the thyroglobulin colloid, releasing free T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub>, which diffuse across the follicle cell membrane and enter the bloodstream.

In the bloodstream, less than one percent of the circulating T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> remains unbound. This free T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> can cross the lipid bilayer of cell membranes and be taken up by cells. The remaining 99 percent of circulating T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> is bound to specialized transport proteins called thyroxine-binding globulins (TBGs), to albumin, or to other plasma proteins. This “packaging” prevents their free diffusion into body cells. When blood levels of T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4 </sub>begin to decline, bound T<sub>3</sub> and T<sub>4</sub> are released from these plasma proteins and readily cross the membrane of target cells. T<sub>3</sub> is more potent than T<sub>4</sub>, and many cells convert T<sub>4</sub> to T<sub>3</sub> through the removal of an iodine atom.
