index: hide
name: Calcitonin

The thyroid gland also secretes a hormone called  **calcitonin** that is produced by the parafollicular cells (also called C cells) that stud the tissue between distinct follicles. Calcitonin is released in response to a rise in blood calcium levels. It appears to have a function in decreasing blood calcium concentrations by:

  * Inhibiting the activity of osteoclasts, bone cells that release calcium into the circulation by degrading bone matrix
  * Increasing osteoblastic activity
  * Decreasing calcium absorption in the intestines
  * Increasing calcium loss in the urine

However, these functions are usually not significant in maintaining calcium homeostasis, so the importance of calcitonin is not entirely understood. Pharmaceutical preparations of calcitonin are sometimes prescribed to reduce osteoclast activity in people with osteoporosis and to reduce the degradation of cartilage in people with osteoarthritis. The hormones secreted by thyroid are summarized in .


****

| Associated hormones | Chemical class | Effect |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Thyroxine (T<sub>4</sub>), triiodothyronine (T<sub>3</sub>) | Amine | Stimulate basal metabolic rate |
| Calcitonin | Peptide | Reduces blood Ca<sup>2+</sup> levels |
    

Of course, calcium is critical for many other biological processes. It is a second messenger in many signaling pathways, and is essential for muscle contraction, nerve impulse transmission, and blood clotting. Given these roles, it is not surprising that blood calcium levels are tightly regulated by the endocrine system. The organs involved in the regulation are the parathyroid glands.
