index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.5.4.1
title: 13.5.4.1 - Multi-centennial Projections

The multi-centennial sea level contributions from ocean expansion and the cryospheric components are discussed in {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_1 Section 13.4.1} to 13.4.4. A synthesis of these contributions is provided in {'Table_13_8 Table 13.8} and {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13} for the end of each century until the year 2500. {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion Thermal expansion} contributions (dark blue bars, {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13}) were obtained from coarse-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} coupled {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} (Vizcaíno et al., 2008; {cite.13.'Solomon_et_al_2009}; {cite.13.'Gillett_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Schewe_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Zickfeld_et_al_2013}). For comparison, the full {Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} of the CMIP5 models which were integrated beyond 2100 is provided in {'Table_13_7 Table 13.7} and as light blue bars in {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13}. Even though the models used for the long-term {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} ({'Table_13_8 Table 13.8}) are less complex compared to the CMIP5 models, their model spread for the different periods and {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} encompasses the CMIP5 spread, which provides medium confidence in the application of the less complex models beyond 2300.

{table:'Table_13_7}

Contributions from the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets were obtained with climate models of comparable complexity coupled to ice-sheet models (Vizcaíno et al., 2010; {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2012}). {Glossary.*Glacier Glacier} projections were obtained by application of the method by {cite.13.'Marzeion_et_al_2012a Marzeion et al. (2012a)} to the CMIP5 model output for scenarios and models that were integrated up to the year 2300. For 2400 and 2500, the same model spread as for 2300 is shown. This is probably underestimating the glacier’s sea level contribution beyond 2300.

The ranges of sea level contributions provided in {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13} and {'Table_13_8 Table 13.8} only represent the model spread and cannot be interpreted as {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} ranges. An uncertainty assessment cannot be provided beyond the year 2100 because of the small number of available simulations, the fact that different scenarios were combined within one scenario group, and the overall low confidence in the ability of the coarse-resolution ice-sheet models to capture the dynamic ice discharge from Greenland and Antarctica, as discussed below. The range for the total {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} was obtained by taking the sum of contributions that result in the lowest and the highest sea level rise and thereby covers the largest possible model spread.

Except for the glacier models ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_2 Section 13.4.2}), the models used here for the period beyond 2100 are different from the models used for the 21st century (Sections {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_1 13.4.1} {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3 13.4.3}, {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4 13.4.4}, and 13.5.1). Generally, the model spread for the total sea level contribution in 2100 is slightly lower than the likely range provided in {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_1 Section 13.5.1} (light red bars in {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13}). This is due to the ice-sheet models, particularly of the Antarctic {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet}, as coarse-resolution model results for thermal expansion cover the range of the CMIP5 projections (light blue vertical lines in {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13} and {'Table_13_7 Table 13.7}.) and the glacier contribution is the same.

Projections beyond 2100 show positive contributions to sea level from thermal expansion, glaciers and changes in Greenland ice sheet SMB. Due to enhanced {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} under warming, the Antarctic ice sheet SMB change makes a negative contribution to sea level in scenarios below 700 ppm {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}-eq. These results were obtained with fully coupled climate–ice sheet models which need to apply a relatively low spatial resolution. In light of the discussion in {Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_3.13_3_3_2 Section 13.3.3.2} and the assessment of the 21st century changes in {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_1 Section 13.4.4.1}, there is low confidence in this result. For scenarios above 700 ppm CO2-eq, Antarctic SMB change is contributing positively to GMSL.

As discussed in Sections {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 13.4.3.2} and {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 13.4.4.2}, there is medium confidence in the ability of coupled ice sheet–climate models to project sea level contributions from dynamic ice-sheet changes in Greenland and Antarctica for the 21st century. In Greenland, dynamic mass loss is limited by topographically defined outlets regions. Furthermore, solid ice discharge induced from interaction with the ocean is self-limiting because retreat of the ice sheet results in less contact with the ocean and less mass loss by iceberg {Glossary.*Calving calving} ({cite.13.'Pfeffer_et_al_2008}; {cite.13.'Graversen_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Price_et_al_2011}). By contrast, the bedrock topography of Antarctica is such that parts of the retreating ice sheet will remain in contact with the ocean. In particular, due to topography that is sloping landward, especially in West Antarctica, enhanced rates of mass loss are expected as the ice retreats.

Although the model used by {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)} is in principle capable of capturing {Glossary.*Grounding_line grounding line} motion of marine ice sheets (see {Box_13_2 Box 13.2}), low confidence is assigned to the model’s ability to capture the associated time scale and the perturbation required to initiate a retreat ({cite.13.'Pattyn_et_al_2013}). The model used by Vizcaino et al. (2010) does not represent ice-shelf dynamics and is thus lacking a fundamental process that can trigger the instability. As stated by the authors, low confidence is thus also assigned to the model’s ability to project future solid ice discharge from Antarctica. It is thus likely that the values depicted in {'Figure_13_13 Figure 13.13} systematically underestimate Antarctica’s future contribution. As detailed in {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_4.13_5_4_2 Section 13.5.4.2}, simulations of the last 5 Myr ({cite.13.'Pollard_and_DeConto_2009}) indicate that on multi-millennial time scales, the Antarctic ice sheet loses mass for elevated temperatures, in contrast to the projections until the year 2500 for the low and medium scenarios.

The model spread of total {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} in 2300 ranges from 0.41 to 0.85 m for the low scenario ({'Table_13_8 Table 13.8}). Using an SEM, {cite.13.'Schaeffer_et_al_2012 Schaeffer et al. (2012)} obtained a significantly larger 90% confidence range of 1.3 to 3.3 m for the {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} scenario. The RCP4.5 scenario, for which they obtained a range of 2.3 to 5.5 m, is categorized here as a medium scenario, and is also significantly higher than the range of 0.27 to 1.51 m computed by the process-based models. Using a different semi-empirical approach, {cite.13.'Jevrejeva_et_al_2012a Jevrejeva et al. (2012a)} obtained a 90% confidence range of 0.13 to 1.74 m for RCP2.6 in the year 2500, which encloses the model spread of 0.50 to 1.02 m for the low scenario from the process-based models. For the medium and high scenarios, however, they obtained ranges of 0.72 to 4.3 m and 1.0 to 11.5 m, respectively, which are significantly higher than the corresponding process-based model spread of 0.18 to 2.32 m and 1.51 to 6.63 m ({'Table_13_8 Table 13.8}). Because projections of {Glossary.*Land_water_storage land water storage} are not available for years beyond 2100 these were not included here.

The higher estimates from the SEMs than the process-based models used here for the long-term projections are consistent with the relation between the two modelling approaches for the 21st century ({'Figure_13_12 Figure 13.12}). {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_3 Section 13.5.3} concluded that the limited or medium evidence supporting SEMs, and the low agreement about their reliability, provides low confidence in their projections for the 21st century. We note here that the confidence in the ability of SEMs is further reduced with the length of the extrapolation period and the deviation of the future {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} from the forcing of the learning period ({cite.13.'Schaeffer_et_al_2012}), thus decreasing confidence over the long time frames considered here.

For increasing global mean SAT, sea level is virtually certain to continue to rise beyond the year 2500 as shown by available process-based model simulations of thermal expansion and ice sheets that were computed beyond 2500 ({cite.13.'Rahmstorf_and_Ganopolski_1999}; {cite.13.'Ridley_et_al_2005}; {cite.13.'Winguth_et_al_2005}; {cite.13.'Driesschaert_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Mikolajewicz_et_al_2007b}; {cite.13.'Swingedouw_et_al_2008}; Vizcaíno et al., 2008; {cite.13.'Solomon_et_al_2009}; Vizcaíno et al., 2010; {cite.13.'Gillett_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Schewe_et_al_2011}).
