index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.6.5
title: 9.6.5 - Sources of Model Errors and Uncertainties

In addition to issues related to {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} and model complexity (see {Chapters.9.9_6.9_6_3 Section 9.6.3}), errors and {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} arise from observational uncertainty in evaluation data and parameterizations (see {Box_9_3 Box 9.3}), choice of model domain and application of boundary conditions (driving data).

In the case of SD, sources of model errors and uncertainties depend on the choice of method, including the choice of the predictors, the estimation of empirical relationships between predictors and predictands from limited data sets, and also the data used to estimate the predictors ({cite.9.'Frost_et_al_2011}). There are numerous different SD methods, and the findings are difficult to generalize.

Small domains allow less freedom for {Glossary.*Regional_Climate_Model RCMs} to generate the small-scale features that give rise to added value (e.g., {cite.9.'Leduc_and_Laprise_2009}). Therefore large domains –covering entire continents– have become more common. Køltzow et al. (2008) found improvements with the use of a larger domain, but the RCM solution can become increasingly ‘decoupled’ from the driving data (e.g., {cite.9.'Rockel_et_al_2008}), which can introduce inconsistencies. Large domains also introduce large {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}, which can significantly contaminate interannual variability of seasonal means ({cite.9.'Kanamitsu_et_al_2010}). Techniques such as spectral nudging ({cite.9.'Misra_2007}; {cite.9.'Separovic_et_al_2012}) can be used to constrain such inconsistencies ({cite.9.'Feser_et_al_2011}). {cite.9.'Winterfeldt_and_Weisse_2009 Winterfeldt and Weisse (2009)} concluded that nudging improved the simulation of marine wind climate, while {cite.9.'Otte_et_al_2012 Otte et al. (2012)} demonstrated improvements in temperature and precipitation. Nudging may, however, also lead to deterioration of features such as precipitation extremes ({cite.9.'Alexandru_et_al_2009}; {cite.9.'Kawazoe_and_Gutowski_2013}). {cite.9.'Veljovic_et_al_2010 Veljovic et al. (2010)} showed that an RCM can in fact improve the large scales with respect to those inherent in the boundary conditions, and argued that nudging may be undesirable.

The quality of RCM results may vary according to the synoptic situation, season, and the geographic location of the lateral boundaries ({cite.9.'Alexandru_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Xue_et_al_2007}; {cite.9.'Laprise_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Separovic_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Leduc_and_Laprise_2009}; {cite.9.'Nikiema_and_Laprise_2010}; Rapaić et al., 2010). In addition to lateral boundary conditions, RCMs also need sea surface information. Few studies have explored the dependency of RCM results on the treatment of the SSTs and {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}, although {cite.9.'Koltzow_et_al_2011 Koltzow et al. (2011)} found that the specification of SSTs was less influential than was the domain or the lateral boundaries. {cite.9.'Woollings_et_al_2010a Woollings et al. (2010a)} investigated the effect of specified {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} on the simulation of the Atlantic storm track and found that it was better simulated with high-resolution SSTs, whereas increasing temporal resolution gave mixed results.

As is the case in global models, RCM errors are directly related to shortcomings in process parameterizations. Examples include the representation of clouds, {Glossary.*Convection convection} and land surface–{Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} interactions, the planetary boundary layer, horizontal diffusion, and microphysics ({cite.9.'Tjernstrom_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Wyser_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Lynn_et_al_2009}; Pfeiffer and Zängl, 2010; {cite.9.'Axelsson_et_al_2011}; Crétat et al., 2012; {cite.9.'Evans_et_al_2012}; {cite.9.'Roy_et_al_2012}; {cite.9.'Solman_and_Pessacg_2012}). The representation of land surface and {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} coupling is also important, particularly for simulating {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon} regions ({cite.9.'Cha_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Yhang_and_Hong_2008}; {cite.9.'Boone_et_al_2010}; {cite.9.'Druyan_et_al_2010}; van den Hurk and van Meijgaard, 2010).
