index: hide
name: Transmissible Spongiform Encephalopathies

Acellular infectious agents called  **prions** are responsible for a group of related diseases known as  **transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSEs)** that occurs in humans and other animals (see <link:>). All TSEs are degenerative, fatal neurological diseases that occur when brain tissue becomes infected by prions. These diseases have a slow onset; symptoms may not become apparent until after an incubation period of years and perhaps decades, but death usually occurs within months to a few years after the first symptoms appear.

TSEs in animals include  **scrapie**, a disease in sheep that has been known since the 1700s, and  **chronic wasting disease**, a disease of deer and elk in the United States and Canada.  **Mad cow disease** is seen in cattle and can be transmitted to humans through the consumption of infected nerve tissues. Human prion diseases include  **Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease** and  **kuru**, a rare disease endemic to Papua New Guinea.

Prions are infectious proteinaceous particles that are not viruses and do not contain nucleic acid. They are typically transmitted by exposure to and ingestion of infected nervous system tissues, tissue transplants, blood transfusions, or contaminated fomites. Prion proteins are normally found in a healthy brain tissue in a form called PrP<sup>C</sup>. However, if this protein is misfolded into a denatured form (PrP<sup>Sc</sup>), it can cause disease. Although the exact function of PrP<sup>C</sup> is not currently understood, the protein folds into mostly alpha helices and binds copper. The rogue protein, on the other hand, folds predominantly into beta-pleated sheets and is resistant to proteolysis. In addition, PrP<sup>Sc</sup> can induce PrP<sup>C</sup> to become misfolded and produce more rogue protein ({'Figure_26_3_Prioncycle Figure 26.3.Prioncycle}).

As PrP<sup>Sc</sup> accumulates, it aggregates and forms fibrils within nerve cells. These protein complexes ultimately cause the cells to die. As a consequence, brain tissues of infected individuals form masses of neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques that give the brain a spongy appearance, which is why these diseases are called spongiform encephalopathy ({'Figure_6_4_CJDbrain Figure 6.4.CJDbrain}). Damage to brain tissue results in a variety of neurological symptoms. Most commonly, affected individuals suffer from memory loss, personality changes, blurred vision, uncoordinated movements, and insomnia. These symptoms gradually worsen over time and culminate in coma and death.

The gold standard for diagnosing TSE is the histological examination of brain biopsies for the presence of characteristic amyloid plaques, vacuoles, and prion proteins. Great care must be taken by clinicians when handling suspected prion-infected materials to avoid becoming infected themselves. Other tissue assays search for the presence of the 14-3-3 protein, a marker for prion diseases like Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. New assays, like RT-QuIC (real-time quaking-induced conversion), offer new hope to effectively detect the abnormal prion proteins in tissues earlier in the course of infection. Prion diseases cannot be cured. However, some medications may help slow their progress. Medical support is focused on keeping patients as comfortable as possible despite progressive and debilitating symptoms.


{image:'Figure_26_3_Prioncycle}
        
