index: hide
name: Normal Microbiota of the Skin

The skin is home to a wide variety of normal microbiota, consisting of commensal organisms that derive nutrition from skin cells and secretions such as sweat and sebum. The normal microbiota of skin tends to inhibit transient-microbe colonization by producing antimicrobial substances and outcompeting other microbes that land on the surface of the skin. This helps to protect the skin from pathogenic infection.

The skin’s properties differ from one region of the body to another, as does the composition of the skin’s microbiota. The availability of nutrients and moisture partly dictates which microorganisms will thrive in a particular region of the skin. Relatively moist skin, such as that of the nares (nostrils) and underarms, has a much different microbiota than the dryer skin on the arms, legs, hands, and top of the feet. Some areas of the skin have higher densities of  **sebaceous glands**. These  **sebum**-rich areas, which include the back, the folds at the side of the nose, and the back of the neck, harbor distinct microbial communities that are less diverse than those found on other parts of the body.

Different types of bacteria dominate the dry, moist, and sebum-rich regions of the skin. The most abundant microbes typically found in the dry and sebaceous regions are  **Betaproteobacteria** and  **Propionibacteria**, respectively. In the moist regions,  **Corynebacterium** and  **Staphylococcus** are most commonly found ({'Figure_21_1_microbiota Figure 21.1.microbiota}). Viruses and fungi are also found on the skin, with  **Malassezia** being the most common type of fungus found as part of the normal microbiota. The role and populations of viruses in the microbiota, known as  **viromes**, are still not well understood, and there are limitations to the techniques used to identify them. However,  **Circoviridae**,  **Papillomaviridae**, and  **Polyomaviridae** appear to be the most common residents in the healthy skin virome.


{image:'Figure_21_1_microbiota}
        
