index: hide
name: Polysaccharides

Polysaccharides, also called  **glycans**, are large polymers composed of hundreds of monosaccharide monomers. Unlike mono- and disaccharides,  **polysaccharides** are not sweet and, in general, they are not soluble in water. Like disaccharides, the monomeric units of polysaccharides are linked together by  **glycosidic bond**s.

Polysaccharides are very diverse in their structure. Three of the most biologically important polysaccharides— **starch**,  **glycogen**, and  **cellulose**—are all composed of repetitive glucose units, although they differ in their structure ({'Figure_7_2_polysacch Figure 7.2.polysacch}). Cellulose consists of a linear chain of glucose molecules and is a common structural component of cell walls in plants and other organisms. Glycogen and starch are branched polymers; glycogen is the primary energy-storage molecule in animals and bacteria, whereas plants primarily store energy in starch. The orientation of the  **glycosidic linkage**s in these three polymers is different as well and, as a consequence, linear and branched macromolecules have different properties.

Modified  **glucose** molecules can be fundamental components of other structural  **polysaccharide**s. Examples of these types of structural polysaccharides are N-acetyl glucosamine (NAG) and N-acetyl muramic acid (NAM) found in bacterial cell wall peptidoglycan. Polymers of NAG form  **chitin**, which is found in fungal cell walls and in the exoskeleton of insects.


{image:'Figure_7_2_polysacch}
        
