index: hide
name: Flame Cells of Planaria and Nephridia of Worms

As multicellular systems evolved to have organ systems that divided the metabolic needs of the body, individual organs evolved to perform the excretory function. Planaria are flatworms that live in freshwater. Their excretory system consists of two tubules connected to a highly branched duct system. The cells in the tubules are called  **flame cells** (or  **protonephridia**) because they have a cluster of cilia that looks like a flickering flame when viewed under the microscope, as illustrated in {'Figure_41_2_2 Figure 41.2.2} **a**. The cilia propel waste matter down the tubules and out of the body through excretory pores that open on the body surface; cilia also draw water from the interstitial fluid, allowing for filtration. Any valuable metabolites are recovered by reabsorption. Flame cells are found in flatworms, including parasitic tapeworms and free-living planaria. They also maintain the organism’s osmotic balance.


{image:'Figure_41_2_2}
        

Earthworms (annelids) have slightly more evolved excretory structures called  **nephridia**, illustrated in {'Figure_41_2_2 Figure 41.2.2} **b**. A pair of nephridia is present on each segment of the earthworm. They are similar to flame cells in that they have a tubule with cilia. Excretion occurs through a pore called the  **nephridiopore**. They are more evolved than the flame cells in that they have a system for tubular reabsorption by a capillary network before excretion.
