index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * The recycling of inorganic matter between living organisms and their nonliving environment is called a  **biogeochemical cycle**. Microbes play significant roles in these cycles.
  * In the  **carbon cycle**, heterotrophs degrade reduced organic molecule to produce carbon dioxide, whereas autotrophs fix carbon dioxide to produce organics.  **Methanogens** typically form methane by using CO<sub>2</sub> as a final electron acceptor during anaerobic respiration; methanotrophs oxidize the methane, using it as their carbon source.
  * In the  **nitrogen cycle**, nitrogen-fixing bacteria convert atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia (ammonification). The ammonia can then be oxidized to nitrite and nitrate (nitrification). Nitrates can then be assimilated by plants. Soil bacteria convert nitrate back to nitrogen gas (denitrification).
  * In  **sulfur cycling**, many anoxygenic photosynthesizers and chemoautotrophs use hydrogen sulfide as an electron donor, producing elemental sulfur and then sulfate; sulfate-reducing bacteria and archaea then use sulfate as a final electron acceptor in anaerobic respiration, converting it back to hydrogen sulfide.
  * Human activities that introduce excessive amounts of naturally limited nutrients (like iron, nitrogen, or phosphorus) to aquatic systems may lead to eutrophication.
  * Microbial  **bioremediation** is the use of microbial metabolism to remove or degrade  **xenobiotics** and other environmental contaminants and pollutants. Enhanced bioremediation techniques may involve the introduction of non-native microbes specifically chosen or engineered for their ability to degrade contaminants.
