index: hide
name: Bacteriophages


{image:'Figure_21_2_2}
        

Most bacteriophages are dsDNA viruses, which use host enzymes for DNA replication and RNA transcription. Phage particles must bind to specific surface receptors and actively insert the genome into the host cell. (The complex tail structures seen in many bacteriophages are actively involved in getting the viral genome across the prokaryotic cell wall.) When infection of a cell by a bacteriophage results in the production of new virions, the infection is said to be  **productive**. If the virions are released by bursting the cell, the virus replicates by means of a  **lytic cycle** (). An example of a lytic bacteriophage is T4, which infects  *Escherichia coli* found in the human intestinal tract. Sometimes, however, a virus can remain within the cell without being released. For example, when a temperate bacteriophage infects a bacterial cell, it replicates by means of a  **lysogenic cycle** (), and the viral genome is incorporated into the genome of the host cell. When the phage DNA is incorporated into the host-cell genome, it is called a  **prophage**. An example of a lysogenic bacteriophage is the λ (lambda) virus, which also infects the  *E*.  *coli* bacterium. Viruses that infect plant or animal cells may sometimes undergo infections where they are not producing virions for long periods. An example is the animal  *herpesviruses*, including herpes simplex viruses, the cause of oral and genital herpes in humans. In a process called  **latency**, these viruses can exist in nervous tissue for long periods of time without producing new virions, only to leave latency periodically and cause lesions in the skin where the virus replicates. Even though there are similarities between lysogeny and latency, the term lysogenic cycle is usually reserved to describe bacteriophages. Latency will be described in more detail in the next section.
