index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 2.5.4
title: 2.5.4 - Surface Humidity

{cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} reported widespread increases in surface air moisture content since 1976, along with near-constant {Glossary.*Relative_humidity relative humidity} over large scales though with some significant changes specific to {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, time of day or season.

In good agreement with previous analysis from {cite.2.'Dai_2006 Dai (2006)}, {cite.2.'Willett_et_al_2008 Willett et al. (2008)} show widespread increasing {Glossary.*Specific_humidity specific humidity} across the globe from the homogenized gridded monthly mean anomaly product HadCRUH (1973–2003). Both Dai and HadCRUH products that are blended land and ocean data products end in 2003 but HadISDH (1973–2012) ({cite.2.'Willett_et_al_2013}) and the NOCS product ({cite.2.'Berry_and_Kent_2009}) are available over the land and ocean respectively through 2012. There are some small isolated but coherent areas of drying over some of the more arid land regions ({'Figure_2_30 Figure 2.30}a). Moistening is largest in the tropics and in the extratropics during summer over both land and ocean. Large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} remains over the SH where data are sparse. Global specific humidity is sensitive to large-scale phenomena such as {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} ({'Figure_2_30 Figure 2.30}b; {Box_2_5 Box 2.5}). It is strongly correlated with land {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} averages over the 23 {cite.2.'Giorgi_and_Francisco_2000 Giorgi and Francisco (2000)} regions for the period 1973–1999 and exhibits increases mostly at or above the increase expected from the {Glossary.*Clausius_Clapeyron_equation_relationship Clausius–Clapeyron} relation (about 7% °C–1; Annex III: Glossary) with high confidence ({cite.2.'Willett_et_al_2010}). Land surface humidity trends are similar in ERA-Interim to observed estimates of homogeneity-adjusted data sets ({cite.2.'Simmons_et_al_2010}; {'Figure_2_30 Figure 2.30}b).

{image:'Figure_2_30}

Since 2000 surface specific humidity over land has remained largely unchanged ({'Figure_2_30 Figure 2.30}) whereas land areas have on average warmed slightly ({'Figure_2_14 Figure 2.14}), implying a reduction in land region relative humidity. This may be linked to the greater warming of the land surface relative to the ocean surface ({cite.2.'Joshi_et_al_2008}). The marine specific humidity ({cite.2.'Berry_and_Kent_2009}), like that over land, shows widespread increases that correlate strongly with {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST}. However, there is a marked decline in marine relative humidity around 1982. This is reported in {cite.2.'Willett_et_al_2008 Willett et al. (2008)} where its origin is concluded to be a non-climatic data issue owing to a change in reporting practice for dewpoint temperature.

In summary, it is very likely that global near surface air specific humidity has increased since the 1970s. However, during recent years the near surface moistening over land has abated (medium confidence). As a result, fairly widespread decreases in relative humidity near the surface are observed over the land in recent years.

{table:'Table_2_11}
