index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.3.4
title: 13.3.4 - Contributions from Water Storage on Land

Changes in water storage on land in response to climate change and variability (i.e., water stored in rivers, lakes, wetlands, the vadose zone, aquifers and snow pack at high latitudes and altitudes) and from direct human-induced effects (i.e., storage of water in reservoirs and groundwater pumping) have the potential to contribute to {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change}. Based on satellite observations of the Northern Hemisphere (NH) snowpack, {cite.13.'Biancamaria_et_al_2011 Biancamaria et al. (2011)} found no significant {Glossary.*Trend trend} in the contribution of snow to sea level. Estimates of climate-related changes in {Glossary.*Land_water_storage land water storage} over the past few decades rely on global hydrological models because corresponding observations are inadequate ({cite.13.'Milly_et_al_2010}). In assessing the relation between terrestrial water storage and climate, {cite.13.'Milly_et_al_2003 Milly et al. (2003)} and Ngo-Duc et al. (2005) found no long-term climatic trend in total water storage, but documented interannual to decadal fluctuations, equivalent to several millimetres of sea level. Recent studies have shown that interannual variability in observed GMSL correlates with {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} indices ({cite.13.'Nerem_et_al_2010}) and is inversely related to ENSO-driven changes of terrestrial water storage, especially in the tropics ({cite.13.'Llovel_et_al_2011}). During El Niño events, sea level (and ocean mass) tends to be higher because ocean precipitation increases and land precipitation decreases in the tropics ({cite.13.'Cazenave_et_al_2012}). The reverse happens during {Glossary.*La_Nin_a La Niña} events, as seen during 2010–2011, when there was a decrease in GMSL due to a temporary increase in water storage on the land, especially in Australia, northern South America, and southeast Asia ({cite.13.'Boening_et_al_2012}) ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_5 Section 13.3.5}).

Direct human interventions on land water storage also induce sea level changes ({cite.13.'Sahagian_2000}; {cite.13.'Gornitz_2001}; {cite.13.'Huntington_2008}; {cite.13.'Lettenmaier_and_Milly_2009}). The largest contributions come from impoundment in reservoirs and groundwater withdrawal. Over the past half-century, storage in tens of thousands of reservoirs has offset some of the sea level rise that would otherwise have occurred. {cite.13.'Chao_et_al_2008 Chao et al. (2008)} estimated that the nearly 30,000 reservoirs built during the 20th century resulted in nominal reservoir storage up to 2007 equivalent to ~23 mm of sea level fall (mostly since 1940), with a stabilization in recent years. Chao et al. further assumed that the reservoirs were 85% full, and by including seepage into groundwater as estimated from a model, they obtained a total of 30 mm of sea level fall (equivalent to a rate of sea level fall of 0.55 mm yr–1 from 1950 to 2000). Their seepage estimate was argued to be unrealistically large, however, because it assumes aquifers are infinite and have no interfering boundary conditions ({cite.13.'Lettenmaier_and_Milly_2009}; {cite.13.'Konikow_2013}). {cite.13.'Chao_et_al_2008 Chao et al. (2008)} argued that sedimentation of reservoirs does not reduce their sea level contribution, but their argument is disputed ({cite.13.'Gregory_et_al_2013b}). {cite.13.'Lettenmaier_and_Milly_2009 Lettenmaier and Milly (2009)} suggested a loss of capacity due to sedimentation at 1% yr–1. Given the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} about them, neither the seepage nor the effect of sedimentation is included in the budget ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_6 Section 13.3.6}). Here the (negative) GMSL contribution from reservoir storage is estimated as 85% [70 to 100%] of the nominal capacity (with the lower limit coming from {cite.13.'Pokhrel_et_al_2012 Pokhrel et al. (2012)}).

{cite.13.'Konikow_2011 Konikow (2011)} estimated that human-induced groundwater depletion contributed 0.26 ± 0.07 mm yr–1 to GMSL rise over 1971–2008 and 0.34 ± 0.07 mm yr–1 over 1993–2008 (based mostly on observational methods), whereas {cite.13.'Wada_et_al_2012 Wada et al. (2012)} estimated values of 0.42 ± 0.08 mm yr–1 over 1971–2008 and 0.54 ± 0.09 mm yr–1 over 1993–2008 (based on modelling of water fluxes). The average of these two series with the difference as a measure of the uncertainty is used in the sea level budget ({Chapters.13.13_3.13_3_6 Section 13.3.6}). {cite.13.'Pokhrel_et_al_2012 Pokhrel et al. (2012)} estimated a larger groundwater depletion, but {cite.13.'Konikow_2013 Konikow (2013)} (disputed by Pohkrel et al. (2013)) argued that their underlying assumptions of defining depletion as equivalent to groundwater use, and allowing unlimited extraction to meet water demand, led to substantial overestimates of depletion.

In summary, climate-related changes in water and snow storage on land do not show significant long-term trends for the recent decades. However, direct human interventions in land water storage (reservoir impoundment and groundwater depletion) have each contributed at least several tenths of mm yr–1 of {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} ({'Figure_13_4 Figure 13.4}, {'Table_13_1 Table 13.1}). {Glossary.*Reservoir Reservoir} impoundment exceeded groundwater depletion for the majority of the 20th century but groundwater depletion has increased and now exceeds current rates of impoundment, contributing to an increased rate of GMSL rise. The net contribution for the 20th century is estimated by adding the average of the two groundwater depletion estimates to the reservoir storage term ({'Figure_13_4 Figure 13.4}c). The trends are -0.11 [-0.16 to -0.06] mm yr-1 for 1901-1990, 0.12 [0.03 to 0.22] mm yr-1 for 1971 to 2010 and 0.38 [0.26 to 0.49] mm yr-1 for 1993 to 2010 ({'Table_13_1 Table 13.1}).
