index: hide
name: Complement-Mediated Immunoassay

One of the key functions of antibodies is the activation (fixation) of complement. When antibody binds to bacteria, for example, certain  **complement proteins** recognize the bound antibody and activate the  **complement cascade**. In response, other complement proteins bind to the bacteria where some serve as  **opsonins**to increase the efficiency of phagocytosis and others create holes in gram-negative bacterial cell membranes, causing lysis. This lytic activity can be used to detect the presence of antibodies against specific antigens in the serum.

Red blood cells are good indicator cells to use when evaluating complement-mediated cytolysis. Hemolysis of red blood cells releases hemoglobin, which is a brightly colored pigment, and hemolysis of even a small number of red cells will cause the solution to become noticeably pink ({'Figure_20_2_Complement Figure 20.2.Complement}). This characteristic plays a role in the  **complement fixation test**, which allows the detection of antibodies against specific pathogens. The complement fixation test can be used to check for antibodies against pathogens that are difficult to culture in the lab such as fungi, viruses, or the bacteria  *Chlamydia*.

To perform the complement fixation test, antigen from a pathogen is added to patient serum. If antibodies to the antigen are present, the antibody will bind the antigen and fix all the available complement. When red blood cells and antibodies against red blood cells are subsequently added to the mix, there will be no complement left to lyse the red cells. Thus, if the solution remains clear, the test is positive. If there are no antipathogen antibodies in the patient’s serum, the added antibodies will activate the complement to lyse the red cells, yielding a negative test ({'Figure_20_2_Complement Figure 20.2.Complement}).


{image:'Figure_20_2_Complement}
        

 summarizes the various types of antibody-antigen assays discussed in this section.


****

| Type of Assay | Mechanism | Examples |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Precipitation | Antibody binds to soluble antigen, forming a visible precipitin | Precipitin ring test to visualize lattice formation in solution |
| Immunoelectrophoresis to examine distribution of antigens following electrophoresis |
| Ouchterlony assay to compare diverse antigens |
| Radial immunodiffusion assay to quantify antigens |
| Flocculation | Antibody binds to insoluble molecules in suspension, forming visible aggregates | VDRL test for syphilis |
| Neutralization | Antibody binds to virus, blocking viral entry into target cells and preventing formation of plaques | Plaque reduction assay for detecting presence of neutralizing antibodies in patient sera |
| Complement activation | Antibody binds to antigen, inducing complement activation and leaving no complement to lyse red blood cells | Complement fixation test for patient antibodies against hard-to-culture bacteria such as  *Chlamydia* |
    
