index: hide
name: Basidiomycota: The Club Fungi

The fungi in the Phylum  **Basidiomycota** are easily recognizable under a light microscope by their club-shaped fruiting bodies called  **basidia** (singular,  **basidium**), which are the swollen terminal cells of hyphae. The basidia, which are the reproductive organs of these fungi, are often contained within the familiar mushroom, commonly seen in fields after rain, on the supermarket shelves, and growing on your lawn ({'Figure_24_2_6 Figure 24.2.6}). These mushroom-producing basidiomycetes are sometimes referred to as  *“gill fungi”* because of the presence of gill-like structures on the underside of the cap. The gills are actually  *compacted hyphae* on which the basidia are borne. This group also includes shelf fungi, which cling to the bark of trees like small shelves. In addition, the basidiomycota include smuts and rusts, which are important plant pathogens. Most edible fungi belong to the Phylum Basidiomycota; however, some basidiomycota are inedible and produce deadly toxins. For example,  *Cryptococcus neoformans* causes severe respiratory illness. The infamous death cap mushroom ( *Amanita phalloides*) is related to the fly agaric seen at the beginning of the previous section.


{image:'Figure_24_2_6}
        

The lifecycle of basidiomycetes includes  *alternation of generations* (). Most fungi are haploid through most of their life cycles, but the basidiomycetes produce  *both* haploid and dikaryotic mycelia, with the dikaryotic phase being dominant. (Note: The dikaryotic phase is technically not diploid, since the nuclei remain unfused until shortly before spore production.) In the basidiomycetes, sexual spores are more common than asexual spores. The sexual spores form in the club-shaped basidium and are called basidiospores. In the basidium, nuclei of two different mating strains fuse (karyogamy), giving rise to a diploid zygote that then undergoes meiosis. The haploid nuclei migrate into four different chambers appended to the basidium, and then become basidiospores.

Each basidiospore germinates and generates  *monokaryotic haploid hyphae*. The mycelium that results is called a primary mycelium. Mycelia of different mating strains can combine and produce a secondary mycelium that contains haploid nuclei of two different mating strains. This is the dominant dikaryotic stage of the basidiomycete life cycle. Thus, each cell in this mycelium has two haploid nuclei, which will not fuse until formation of the basidium. Eventually, the secondary mycelium generates a  **basidiocarp**, a fruiting body that protrudes from the ground—this is what we think of as a mushroom. The basidiocarp bears the developing basidia on the gills under its cap.
