index: hide
name: The Genetic Code

To summarize what we know to this point, the cellular process of transcription generates messenger RNA (mRNA), a mobile molecular copy of one or more genes with an alphabet of A, C, G, and uracil (U). Translation of the mRNA template converts nucleotide-based genetic information into a protein product. Protein sequences consist of 20 commonly occurring amino acids; therefore, it can be said that the protein alphabet consists of 20 letters. Each amino acid is defined by a three-nucleotide sequence called the triplet  **codon**. The relationship between a nucleotide codon and its corresponding amino acid is called the  **genetic code**.

Given the different numbers of “letters” in the mRNA and protein “alphabets,” combinations of nucleotides corresponded to single amino acids. Using a three-nucleotide code means that there are a total of 64 (4 × 4 × 4) possible combinations; therefore, a given amino acid is encoded by more than one nucleotide triplet ({'Figure_9_4_2 Figure 9.4.2}).


{image:'Figure_9_4_2}
        

Three of the 64 codons terminate protein synthesis and release the polypeptide from the translation machinery. These triplets are called  **stop codons**. Another codon, AUG, also has a special function. In addition to specifying the amino acid methionine, it also serves as the  **start codon** to initiate translation. The reading frame for translation is set by the AUG start codon near the 5' end of the mRNA. The genetic code is universal. With a few exceptions, virtually all species use the same genetic code for protein synthesis, which is powerful evidence that all life on Earth shares a common origin.
