index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.3.1.1
title: 11.3.1.1 - Uncertainty in Near-term Climate Projections

As discussed in {Chapters.1 Chapter 1} ({Chapters.1.1_4 Section 1.4}) and 12 ({Chapters.12.12_2 Section 12.2}), climate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} are subject to several sources of uncertainty. Here three main sources are distinguished. The first arises from natural {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}, which is intrinsic to the climate system, and includes phenomena such as variability in the mid-latitude {Glossary.*Storm_tracks storm tracks} and the {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO}. The existence of internal variability places fundamental limits on the precision with which future climate variables can be projected. The second is uncertainty concerning the past, present and future forcing of the climate system by natural and {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forcing agents such as {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs}, aerosols, solar forcing and {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change}. Forcing agents may be specified in various ways, for example, as {Topics.*Emissions emissions} or as concentrations (see {Chapters.12.12_2 Section 12.2}). The third is uncertainty related to the response of the climate system to the specified forcing agents.

Quantifying the uncertainty that arises from each of the three sources is an important challenge. For projections, no attempt is made to predict the evolution of the internal variability. Instead, the statistics of this variability are included as a component of the uncertainty associated with a {Glossary.*Projection projection}. The magnitude of internal variability can be estimated from observations (Chapters {Chapters.2}, {Chapters.3} and {Chapters.4}) or from {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} ({Chapters.9 Chapter 9}). Challenges arise in estimating the variability on decadal and longer time scales, and for rare events such as extremes, as observational records are often too short to provide robust estimates.

Uncertainty concerning the past forcing of the climate system arises from a lack of direct or {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} observations, and from observational errors. This uncertainty can influence future projections of some variables (particularly large-scale ocean variables) for years or even decades ahead (e.g., {cite.11.'Meehl_and_Hu_2006}; {cite.11.'Stenchikov_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'Gregory_2010}). Uncertainty about future forcing arises from the inability to predict future anthropogenic emissions and land use change, and natural forcings (e.g., volcanoes), and from {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} concerning {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} and other biogeochemical feedbacks ({Chapters.6 Chapter 6}, 12 and Annex II.4.1). The uncertainties in future anthropogenic forcing are typically investigated through the development of specific {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} (e.g., for emissions or concentrations), such as the RCP scenarios (Chapters {Chapters.1} and {Chapters.8}). Different scenarios give rise to different climate projections, and the spread of such projections is commonly described as scenario uncertainty. The sensitivity of climate projections to alternative scenarios for future anthropogenic emissions is discussed especially in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6.11_3_6_1 Section 11.3.6.1}

To project the {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} to specified forcing agents, climate models are required. The term model uncertainty describes uncertainty about the extent to which any particular climate model provides an accurate representation of the real climate system. This uncertainty arises from approximations required in the development of models. Such approximations affect the representation of all aspects of the climate including natural internal variability and the response to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcings}. As discussed in {Chapters.1 Chapter 1} ({Chapters.1.1_4.1_4_2 Section 1.4.2}), the term model uncertainty is sometimes used in a narrower sense to describe the spread between projections generated using different models or model versions; however, such a measure is crude as it takes no account of factors such as model quality ({Chapters.9 Chapter 9}) or model independence. The term model response uncertainty is used here to describe the dimension of model uncertainty that is directly related to the response to external forcings. To obtain projections of {Topics.*Extreme_Events extreme events} such as tropical cyclones, or regional phenomena such as orographic rainfall, it is sometimes necessary to employ a dynamical or statistical {Glossary.*Downscaling downscaling} procedure. Such downscaling introduces an additional dimension of model uncertainty (e.g., {cite.11.'Alexandru_et_al_2007}).

The relative importance of the different sources of uncertainty depends on the variable of interest, the space and time scales involved (Section 10.5.4.3 of {cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2007b Meehl et al. (2007b)}), and the lead-time of the projection. {'Figure_11_8 Figure 11.8} provides an illustration of these dependencies based on an analysis of CMIP5 projections (following {cite.11.'Hawkins_and_Sutton_2009}, 2011;{cite.11.'Yip_et_al_2011}). In this example, the forcing-related uncertainty is estimated using the spread of projections for different RCP scenarios (i.e., scenario uncertainty), while the spread among different models for individual RCP scenarios is used as a measure of the model response uncertainty. Internal variability is estimated from the models as in {cite.11.'Hawkins_and_Sutton_2009 Hawkins and Sutton (2009)}. Key points are: (1) the uncertainty in near-term projections is dominated by internal variability and {Glossary.*Model_spread model spread}. This finding provides some of the rationale for considering near-term projections separately from long-term projections. Note, however, that the RCP scenarios do not sample the full range of uncertainty in future anthropogenic forcing, and that uncertainty in {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcings in particular may be more important than is suggested by {'Figure_11_8 Figure 11.8} (see {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6.11_3_6_1 Section 11.3.6.1}); (2) internal variability becomes increasingly important on smaller space and time scales; (3) for projections of precipitation, scenario uncertainty is less important and (on regional scales) internal variability is generally more important than for projections of surface air temperature; (4) the full model uncertainty may well be larger or smaller than the model spread due to common errors or unrealistic models.

{image:'Figure_11_8}

A key quantity for any {Glossary.*Climate_projection climate projection} is the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio ({cite.11.'Christensen_et_al_2007}), where the ‘signal’ is a measure of the amplitude of the projected climate change, and the noise is a measure of the uncertainty in the projection. Higher S/N ratios indicate more robust projections of change and/or changes that are large relative to background levels of variability. Depending on the purpose, it may be useful to identify the noise with the total uncertainty, or with a specific component such as the internal variability. The evolution of the S/N ratio with lead time depends on whether the signal grows more rapidly than the noise, or vice versa. {'Figure_11_8 Figure 11.8} (top right) shows that, when the noise is identified with the total uncertainty, the S/N ratio for surface air temperature is typically higher at lower latitudes and has a maximum at a lead time of a few decades ({cite.11.'Cox_and_Stephenson_2007}; {cite.11.'Hawkins_and_Sutton_2009}). The former feature is primarily a consequence of the greater amplitude of internal variability in mid-latitudes. The latter feature arises because over the first few decades, when scenario uncertainty is small, the signal grows most rapidly, but subsequently, the contribution from scenario uncertainty grows more rapidly than does the signal, so the S/N ratio falls. See Hawkins and Sutton (2009, 2011) for further details.
