index: hide
name: Cutaneous Aspergillosis

Another cause of cutaneous mycoses is  **Aspergillus**, a genus consisting of molds of many different species, some of which cause a condition called  **aspergillosis**. Primary cutaneous aspergillosis, in which the infection begins in the skin, is rare but does occur. More common is secondary cutaneous aspergillosis, in which the infection begins in the respiratory system and disseminates systemically. Both primary and secondary cutaneous aspergillosis result in distinctive eschars that form at the site or sites of infection ({'Figure_21_4_aspergillo Figure 21.4.aspergillo}). Pulmonary aspergillosis will be discussed more thoroughly in <link:>).


{image:'Figure_21_4_aspergillo}
        

Primary cutaneous aspergillosis usually occurs at the site of an injury and is most often caused by  *Aspergillus fumigatus* or  *Aspergillus flavus*. It is usually reported in patients who have had an injury while working in an agricultural or outdoor environment. However, opportunistic infections can also occur in health-care settings, often at the site of intravenous catheters, venipuncture wounds, or in association with burns, surgical wounds, or occlusive dressing. After candidiasis, aspergillosis is the second most common hospital-acquired fungal infection and often occurs in immunocompromised patients, who are more vulnerable to opportunistic infections.

Cutaneous aspergillosis is diagnosed using patient history, culturing, histopathology using a skin biopsy. Treatment involves the use of antifungal medications such as  **voriconazole** (preferred for invasive aspergillosis),  **itraconazole**, and  **amphotericin B** if itraconazole is not effective. For immunosuppressed individuals or burn patients, medication may be used and surgical or immunotherapy treatments may be needed.
