index: hide
name: Candidiasis of the Skin and Nails

 **Candida albicans** and other yeasts in the genus  *Candida* can cause skin infections referred to as cutaneous candidiasis.  *Candida* spp. are sometimes responsible for  **intertrigo**, a general term for a rash that occurs in a skin fold, or other localized rashes on the skin.  *Candida* can also infect the nails, causing them to become yellow and harden ({'Figure_21_4_candidiasi Figure 21.4.candidiasi}).


{image:'Figure_21_4_candidiasi}
        

Candidiasis of the skin and nails is diagnosed through clinical observation and through culture, Gram stain, and KOH wet mounts. Susceptibility testing for anti-fungal agents can also be done. Cutaneous candidiasis can be treated with topical or systemic azole antifungal medications. Because candidiasis can become invasive, patients suffering from HIV/AIDS, cancer, or other conditions that compromise the immune system may benefit from preventive treatment. Azoles, such as  **clotrimazole**,  **econazole**,  **fluconazole**,  **ketoconazole**, and  **miconazole**;  **nystatin**;  **terbinafine**; and  **naftifine** may be used for treatment. Long-term treatment with medications such as  **itraconazole** or  **ketoconazole** may be used for chronic infections. Repeat infections often occur, but this risk can be reduced by carefully following treatment recommendations, avoiding excessive moisture, maintaining good health, practicing good hygiene, and having appropriate clothing (including footwear).

 *Candida* also causes infections in other parts of the body besides the skin. These include vaginal yeast infections (see <link:>) and oral thrush (see <link:>).
