index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 2.4.2.1.2
title: 2.4.2.1.2 - Satellite SST data records

Satellite {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} data sets are based on measuring electromagnetic radiation that left the ocean surface and got transmitted through the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}. Because of the complexity of processes involved, the majority of such data has to be calibrated on the basis of in situ observations. The resulting data sets, however, provide a description of global SST fields with a level of spatial detail unachievable by in situ data only. The principal IR sensor is the Advanced Very High {Glossary.*Resolution Resolution} Radiometer (AVHRR). Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, the AVHRR time series has been reprocessed consistently back to March 1981 ({cite.2.'Casey_et_al_2010}) to create the AVHRR Pathfinder v5.2 data set. Passive microwave data sets of SST are available since 1997 equatorward of 40° and near-globally since 2002 ({cite.2.'Wentz_et_al_2000}; {cite.2.'Gentemann_et_al_2004}). They are generally less accurate than IR-based SST data sets, but their superior coverage in areas of persistent cloudiness provides SST estimates where the IR record has none ({cite.2.'Reynolds_et_al_2010}).

The (Advanced) Along Track Scanning Radiometer (A)ATSR) series of three sensors was designed for climate monitoring of SST; their combined record starts in August 1991 and exceeds two decades (it stopped with the demise of the ENVISAT platform in 2012). The (A) ATSRs are ‘dual-view’ IR radiometers intended to allow atmospheric effects removal without the use of in situ observations. Since AR4, (A)ATSR observations have been reprocessed with new estimation techniques ({cite.2.'Embury_and_Merchant_2011}). The resulting SST products seem to be more accurate than many in situ observations ({cite.2.'Embury_et_al_2011}). In terms of monthly global means, the agreement is illustrated in {'Figure_2_17 Figure 2.17}. By analyzing (A)ATSR and in situ data together, Kennedy at al. (2012) verified and extended existing models for biases and random errors of in situ data.
