index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.6.1.5
title: 10.6.1.5 - Tropical Cyclones

{cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} concluded that ‘{Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} factors more likely than not have contributed to an increase in tropical cyclone intensity’ ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b}). Evidence that supports this assessment was the strong correlation between the Power Dissipation Index (PDI, an index of the destructiveness of tropical cyclones) and tropical Atlantic SSTs ({cite.10.'Emanuel_2005}; {cite.10.'Elsner_2006}) and the association between Atlantic warming and the increase in {Topics.*Surface_Temperature GMST} ({cite.10.'Mann_and_Emanuel_2006}; {cite.10.'Trenberth_and_Shea_2006}). Observations suggest an increase globally in the intensities of the strongest tropical cyclones ({cite.10.'Elsner_et_al_2008}) but it is difficult to attribute such changes to particular causes ({cite.10.'Knutson_et_al_2010}). The US Climate Change Science Program (CCSP; {cite.10.'Kunkel_et_al_2008}) discussed human contributions to recent hurricane activity based on a two-step {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution attribution} approach. They concluded merely that it is very likely ({cite.10.'Knutson_et_al_2010}) that human-induced increase in {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} has contributed to the increase in SSTs in the hurricane formation regions and that over the past 50 years there has been a strong statistical connection between tropical Atlantic SSTs and Atlantic hurricane activity as measured by the PDI. {cite.10.'Knutson_et_al_2010 Knutson et al. (2010)}, assessed that ‘...it remains uncertain whether past changes in tropical cyclone activity have exceeded the variability expected from natural causes.’ {cite.10.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012 Seneviratne et al. (2012)} concurred with this finding. {Chapters.14.14_6.14_6_1 Section 14.6.1} gives a detailed account of past and future changes in tropical cyclones. This section assesses causes of observed changes.

Studies that directly attribute tropical cyclone activity changes to anthropogenic GHG {Topics.*Emissions emission} are lacking. Among many factors that may affect tropical cyclone activity, tropical SSTs have increased and this increase has been {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} at least in part to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} ({cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2008a}). However, there are diverse views on the connection between tropical cyclone activity and {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} (see {Chapters.14.14_6.14_6_1 Section 14.6.1} for details). Strong correlation between the PDI and tropical Atlantic SSTs ({cite.10.'Emanuel_2005}; {cite.10.'Elsner_2006}) would suggest an anthropogenic influence on tropical cyclone activity. However, recent studies also suggest that regional potential intensity correlates with the difference between regional SSTs and spatially averaged SSTs in the tropics ({cite.10.'Vecchi_and_Soden_2007}; {cite.10.'Xie_et_al_2010}; {cite.10.'Ramsay_and_Sobel_2011}) and {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} are uncertain on whether the relative SST will increase over the 21st century under GHG forcing ({cite.10.'Vecchi_et_al_2008}; {cite.10.'Xie_et_al_2010}; {cite.10.'Villarini_and_Vecchi_2012}, 2013). Analyses of CMIP5 simulations suggest that while PDI over the North Atlantic is projected to increase towards late 21st century no detectable change in PDI should be present in the 20th century ({cite.10.'Villarini_and_Vecchi_2013}) . On the other hand, {cite.10.'Emanuel_et_al_2013 Emanuel et al. (2013)} point out that while {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCM} hindcasts indeed predict little change over the 20th century, {Glossary.*Downscaling downscaling} driving by {Topics.*Reanalysis reanalysis data} that incorporate historical observations are in much better accord with observations and do indicate a late 20th century increase.

Some recent studies suggest that the reduction in the {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing (both anthropogenic and natural) over the Atlantic since the 1970s may have contributed to the increase in tropical cyclone activity in the {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} (see {Chapters.14.14_6.14_6_1 Section 14.6.1} for details), and similarly that aerosols may have acted to reduce tropical cyclone activity in the Atlantic in earlier years when aerosol forcing was increasing ({cite.10.'Villarini_and_Vecchi_2013}). However, there are different views on the relative contribution of aerosols and decadal natural variability of the climate system to the observed changes in Atlantic tropical cyclone activity among these studies. Some studies indicate that aerosol changes have been the main driver ({cite.10.'Mann_and_Emanuel_2006}; {cite.10.'Evan_et_al_2009}; {cite.10.'Booth_et_al_2012}; {cite.10.'Villarini_and_Vecchi_2012}, 2013). Other studies infer the influence of natural variability to be as large as or larger than that from aerosols ({cite.10.'Zhang_and_Delworth_2009}; {cite.10.'Villarini_and_Vecchi_2012}, 2013).

Globally, there is low confidence in any long-term increases in tropical cyclone activity ({Chapters.2.2_6.2_6_3 Section 2.6.3}) and we assess that there is low confidence in attributing global changes to any particular cause. In the North Atlantic region there is medium confidence that a reduction in aerosol forcing over the North Atlantic has contributed at least in part to the observed increase in tropical cyclone activity since the 1970s. There remains substantial disagreement on the relative importance of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}, GHG forcing and aerosols for this observed {Glossary.*Trend trend}. It remains uncertain whether past changes in tropical cyclone activity are outside the range of natural internal variability.
