index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.1
title: 4.2.1 - Background

{Glossary.*Sea_ice Sea ice} (see Glossary) is an important component of the climate system. A sea ice cover on the ocean changes the surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo}, insulates the ocean from heat loss, and provides a barrier to the exchange of momentum and gases such as water vapour and {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} between the ocean and {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}. Salt ejected by growing sea ice alters the density structure and modifies the circulation of the ocean. {Topics.*Regional_Climate Regional climate} changes affect the sea ice characteristics and these changes can feed back on the climate system, both regionally and globally. Sea ice is also a major component of polar ecosystems; plants and animals at all trophic levels find a habitat in, or are associated with, sea ice.

Most sea ice exists as pack ice, and wind and ocean currents drive the drift of individual pieces of ice (called floes). Divergence and shear in sea ice motion create areas of open water where, during colder months, new ice can quickly form and grow. On the other hand, convergent ice motion causes the ice cover to thicken by deformation. Two relatively thin floes colliding with each other can ‘raft’, stacking one on top of the other and thickening the ice. When thicker floes collide, thick ridges may be built from broken pieces, with a height above the surface (ridge sail) of 2 m or more, and a much greater thickness (~10 m) and width below the ocean surface (ridge keel).

Sea ice thickness also increases by basal freezing during winter months. But the thicker the ice becomes the more it insulates heat loss from the ocean to the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} and the slower the basal growth is. There is an equilibrium thickness for basal ice growth that is dependent on the surface {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} and heat from the deep ocean below. Snow cover lying on the surface of sea ice provides additional insulation, and also alters the surface albedo and aerodynamic roughness. But also, and particularly in the Antarctic, a heavy snow load on thin sea ice can depress the ice surface and allow seawater to flood the snow. This saturated snow layer freezes quickly to form ‘snow ice’ (see {FAQ_4_1 FAQ 4.1}).

Because sea ice is formed from seawater it contains sea salt, mostly in small pockets of concentrated brine. The total salt content in newly formed sea ice is only 25 to 50% of that in the parent seawater, and the residual salt rejected as the sea ice forms alters ocean water density and stability. The salinity of the ice decreases as it ages, and particularly during the Arctic summer when melt water (including from melt ponds that form on the surface) drains through and flushes the ice. The salinity and porosity of sea ice affect its mechanical strength, its thermal properties and its electrical properties – the latter being very important for remote sensing.

Geographical constraints play a dominant but not an exclusive role in determining the quite different characteristics of sea ice in the Arctic and the Antarctic (see {FAQ_4_1 FAQ 4.1}). This is one of the reasons why changes in sea ice extent and thickness are very different in the north and the south. We also have much more information on Arctic sea ice thickness than we do on Antarctic sea ice thickness, and so discuss Arctic and Antarctic separately in this assessment.
