index: hide
name: Intercellular Junctions

Cells can also communicate with each other via direct contact, or intercellular junctions. There are differences in the ways that plant and animal and fungal cells communicate. Plasmodesmata are junctions between plant cells; whereas, animal cell contacts include tight junctions, gap junctions, and desmosomes.

## Plasmodesmata

In general, long stretches of the plasma membranes of neighboring plant cells cannot touch one another because the cell wall that surrounds each cell separates them (). How then, can a plant transfer water and other soil nutrients from its roots, through its stems, and to its leaves? Such transport uses the vascular tissues (xylem and phloem) primarily. There also exist structural modifications, which we call  **plasmodesmata** (singular = plasmodesma). Numerous channels that pass between adjacent plant cells' cell walls connect their cytoplasm, and enable transport of materials from cell to cell, and thus throughout the plant ({'Figure_4_6_2 Figure 4.6.2}).


{image:'Figure_4_6_2}
        

## Tight Junctions

A  **tight junction** is a watertight seal between two adjacent animal cells ({'Figure_4_6_3 Figure 4.6.3}). Proteins (predominantly two proteins called claudins and occludins) tightly hold the cells against each other.


{image:'Figure_4_6_3}
        

This tight adherence prevents materials from leaking between the cells; tight junctions are typically found in epithelial tissues that line internal organs and cavities, and comprise most of the skin. For example, the tight junctions of the epithelial cells lining your urinary bladder prevent urine from leaking out into the extracellular space.

## Desmosomes

Also only in animal cells are  **desmosomes**, which act like spot welds between adjacent epithelial cells ({'Figure_4_6_4 Figure 4.6.4}). Cadherins, short proteins in the plasma membrane connect to intermediate filaments to create desmosomes. The cadherins connect two adjacent cells and maintain the cells in a sheet-like formation in organs and tissues that stretch, like the skin, heart, and muscles.


{image:'Figure_4_6_4}
        

## Gap Junctions

 **Gap junctions** in animal cells are like plasmodesmata in plant cells in that they are channels between adjacent cells that allow for transporting ions, nutrients, and other substances that enable cells to communicate ({'Figure_4_6_5 Figure 4.6.5}). Structurally, however, gap junctions and plasmodesmata differ.


{image:'Figure_4_6_5}
        

Gap junctions develop when a set of six proteins (connexins) in the plasma membrane arrange themselves in an elongated donut-like configuration - a connexon. When the connexon's pores (“doughnut holes”) in adjacent animal cells align, a channel between the two cells forms. Gap junctions are particularly important in cardiac muscle. The electrical signal for the muscle to contract passes efficiently through gap junctions, allowing the heart muscle cells to contract in tandem.
