index: hide
name: Platyhelminths (Flatworms)

Phylum  **Platyhelminthes** (the platyhelminths) are  **flatworms**. This group includes the flukes, tapeworms, and the turbellarians, which include planarians. The flukes and tapeworms are medically important parasites ({'Figure_5_2_platy Figure 5.2.platy}).

The  **flukes** ( **trematodes**) are nonsegmented flatworms that have an oral sucker ({'Figure_5_2_mouth Figure 5.2.mouth}) (and sometimes a second ventral sucker) and attach to the inner walls of intestines, lungs, large blood vessels, or the liver. Trematodes have complex life cycles, often with multiple hosts. Several important examples are the  **liver flukes** ( **Clonorchis** and  **Opisthorchis**), the  **intestinal fluke** ( **Fasciolopsis buski**), and the  **oriental lung fluke** ( **Paragonimus westermani**).  **Schistosomiasis** is a serious parasitic disease, considered second in the scale of its impact on human populations only to malaria. The parasites  **Schistosoma** *mansoni, S. haematobium*, and  *S. japonicum*, which are found in freshwater snails, are responsible for schistosomiasis ({'Figure_5_2_schistolLC Figure 5.2.schistolLC}). Immature forms burrow through the skin into the blood. They migrate to the lungs, then to the liver and, later, other organs. Symptoms include anemia, malnutrition, fever, abdominal pain, fluid buildup, and sometimes death.


{image:'Figure_5_2_platy}
        


{image:'Figure_5_2_mouth}
        

The other medically important group of platyhelminths are commonly known as  **tapeworms** ( **cestodes**) and are segmented flatworms that may have suckers or hooks at the  **scolex** (head region) ({'Figure_5_2_mouth Figure 5.2.mouth}). Tapeworms use these suckers or hooks to attach to the wall of the small intestine. The body of the worm is made up of segments called  **proglottid** **s** that contain reproductive structures; these detach when the gametes are fertilized, releasing gravid proglottids with eggs. Tapeworms often have an intermediate host that consumes the eggs, which then hatch into a larval form called an oncosphere. The oncosphere migrates to a particular tissue or organ in the intermediate host, where it forms cysticerci. After being eaten by the definitive host, the cysticerci develop into adult tapeworms in the host's digestive system ({'Figure_5_2_tapewormLC Figure 5.2.tapewormLC}).  **Taenia saginata** (the beef tapeworm) and  *T. solium* (the pork tapeworm) enter humans through ingestion of undercooked, contaminated meat. The adult worms develop and reside in the intestine, but the larval stage may migrate and be found in other body locations such as skeletal and smooth muscle. The beef tapeworm is relatively benign, although it can cause digestive problems and, occasionally, allergic reactions. The pork tapeworm can cause more serious problems when the larvae leave the intestine and colonize other tissues, including those of the central nervous system.  **Diphylobothrium latum** is the largest human tapeworm and can be ingested in undercooked fish. It can grow to a length of 15 meters.  **Echinococcus granulosus** *,* the dog tapeworm, can parasitize humans and uses dogs as an important host.


{image:'Figure_5_2_schistolLC}
        


{image:'Figure_5_2_tapewormLC}
        
