index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.3.3.3
title: 10.3.3.3 - Southern Annular Mode

The Southern Annular Mode ({Glossary.*Southern_Annular_Mode SAM}) index has remained mainly positive since the publication of the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, although it has not been as strongly positive as in the late 1990s. Nonetheless, an index of the SAM shows a significant positive {Glossary.*Trend trend} in most seasons and data sets over the 1951–2011 period ({'Figure_10_13 Figure 10.13}; {'Table_2_14 Table 2.14}). Recent modelling studies confirm earlier findings that the increase in GHG concentrations tends to lead to a strengthening and poleward shift of the SH eddy-driven polar jet ({cite.10.'Karpechko_et_al_2008}; {cite.10.'Son_et_al_2008}, 2010; {cite.10.'Sigmond_et_al_2011}; {cite.10.'Staten_et_al_2012}; {cite.10.'Swart_and_Fyfe_2012}; {cite.10.'Eyring_et_al_2013}; {cite.10.'Gillett_and_Fyfe_2013}) which projects onto the positive phase of the SAM. Stratospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} depletion also induces a strengthening and poleward shift of the polar jet in models, with the largest response in austral summer ({cite.10.'Karpechko_et_al_2008}; {cite.10.'Son_et_al_2008}, 2010; {cite.10.'McLandress_et_al_2011}; {cite.10.'Polvani_et_al_2011}; {cite.10.'Sigmond_et_al_2011}; {cite.10.'Gillett_and_Fyfe_2013}). {cite.10.'Sigmond_et_al_2011 Sigmond et al. (2011)} find approximately equal contributions to simulated annual mean SAM trends from {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} and stratospheric ozone depletion up to the present. {cite.10.'Fogt_et_al_2009 Fogt et al. (2009)} demonstrate that observed SAM trends over the period 1957–2005 are positive in all seasons, but only statistically significant in DJF and March, April, May (MAM), based on simulated {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}. {cite.10.'Roscoe_and_Haigh_2007 Roscoe and Haigh (2007)} apply a regression-based approach and find that stratospheric ozone changes are the primary driver of observed trends in the SAM. Observed trends are also consistent with CMIP3 simulations including stratospheric ozone changes in all seasons, though in MAM observed trends are roughly twice as large as those simulated ({cite.10.'Miller_et_al_2006}). Broadly consistent results are found when comparing observed trends and CMIP5 simulations ({'Figure_10_13 Figure 10.13}), with a station-based SAM index showing a significant positive trend in MAM, JJA and DJF, compared to simulated internal variability over the 1951–2010 period. {cite.10.'Fogt_et_al_2009 Fogt et al. (2009)} find that the largest forced response has likely occurred in DJF, the season in which stratospheric ozone depletion has been the dominant contributor to the observed trends.

Taking these findings together, it is likely that the positive trend in the SAM seen in austral summer since the mid-20th century is due in part to stratospheric ozone depletion. There is medium confidence that GHGs have also played a role.
