index: hide
name: Coagulation

Those more sophisticated and more durable repairs are collectively called  **coagulation**, the formation of a blood clot. The process is sometimes characterized as a cascade, because one event prompts the next as in a multi-level waterfall. The result is the production of a gelatinous but robust clot made up of a mesh of  **fibrin**—an insoluble filamentous protein derived from fibrinogen, the plasma protein introduced earlier—in which platelets and blood cells are trapped. {'Figure_19_5_1 Figure 19.5.1} summarizes the three steps of hemostasis.


{image:'Figure_19_5_1}
        

## Clotting Factors Involved in Coagulation

In the coagulation cascade, chemicals called  **clotting factors** (or coagulation factors) prompt reactions that activate still more coagulation factors. The process is complex, but is initiated along two basic pathways:

  * The extrinsic pathway, which normally is triggered by trauma.
  * The intrinsic pathway, which begins in the bloodstream and is triggered by internal damage to the wall of the vessel.

Both of these merge into a third pathway, referred to as the common pathway (see {'Figure_19_5_1 Figure 19.5.1} **b**). All three pathways are dependent upon the 12 known clotting factors, including Ca<sup>2+</sup> and vitamin K (). Clotting factors are secreted primarily by the liver and the platelets. The liver requires the fat-soluble vitamin K to produce many of them. Vitamin K (along with biotin and folate) is somewhat unusual among vitamins in that it is not only consumed in the diet but is also synthesized by bacteria residing in the large intestine. The calcium ion, considered factor IV, is derived from the diet and from the breakdown of bone. Some recent evidence indicates that activation of various clotting factors occurs on specific receptor sites on the surfaces of platelets.

The 12 clotting factors are numbered I through XIII according to the order of their discovery. Factor VI was once believed to be a distinct clotting factor, but is now thought to be identical to factor V. Rather than renumber the other factors, factor VI was allowed to remain as a placeholder and also a reminder that knowledge changes over time.


****

| Factor number | Name | Type of molecule | Source | Pathway(s) |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| I | Fibrinogen | Plasma protein | Liver | Common; converted into fibrin |
| II | Prothrombin | Plasma protein  | Liver* | Common; converted into thrombin |
| III | Tissue thromboplastin or tissue factor | Lipoprotein mixture | Damaged cells and platelets | Extrinsic |
| IV | Calcium ions | Inorganic ions in plasma | Diet, platelets, bone matrix | Entire process |
| V | Proaccelerin | Plasma protein | Liver, platelets | Extrinsic and intrinsic |
| VI | Not used | Not used | Not used | Not used |
| VII | Proconvertin | Plasma protein | Liver * | Extrinsic |
| VIII | Antihemolytic factor A | Plasma protein factor | Platelets and endothelial cells | Intrinsic; deficiency results in hemophilia A |
| IX | Antihemolytic factor B (plasma thromboplastin component) | Plasma protein | Liver* | Intrinsic; deficiency results in hemophilia B |
| X | Stuart–Prower factor (thrombokinase) | Protein | Liver* | Extrinsic and intrinsic |
| XI | Antihemolytic factor C (plasma thromboplastin antecedent) | Plasma protein | Liver | Intrinsic; deficiency results in hemophilia C |
| XII | Hageman factor | Plasma protein | Liver | Intrinsic; initiates clotting in vitro also activates plasmin |
| XIII | Fibrin-stabilizing factor | Plasma protein | Liver, platelets | Stabilizes fibrin; slows fibrinolysis |
    

## Extrinsic Pathway

The quicker responding and more direct  **extrinsic pathway** (also known as the  **tissue factor** pathway) begins when damage occurs to the surrounding tissues, such as in a traumatic injury. Upon contact with blood plasma, the damaged extravascular cells, which are extrinsic to the bloodstream, release factor III (thromboplastin). Sequentially, Ca<sup>2+</sup> then factor VII (proconvertin), which is activated by factor III, are added, forming an enzyme complex. This enzyme complex leads to activation of factor X (Stuart–Prower factor), which activates the common pathway discussed below. The events in the extrinsic pathway are completed in a matter of seconds.

## Intrinsic Pathway

The  **intrinsic pathway** (also known as the contact activation pathway) is longer and more complex. In this case, the factors involved are intrinsic to (present within) the bloodstream. The pathway can be prompted by damage to the tissues, resulting from internal factors such as arterial disease; however, it is most often initiated when factor XII (Hageman factor) comes into contact with foreign materials, such as when a blood sample is put into a glass test tube. Within the body, factor XII is typically activated when it encounters negatively charged molecules, such as inorganic polymers and phosphate produced earlier in the series of intrinsic pathway reactions. Factor XII sets off a series of reactions that in turn activates factor XI (antihemolytic factor C or plasma thromboplastin antecedent) then factor IX (antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin). In the meantime, chemicals released by the platelets increase the rate of these activation reactions. Finally, factor VIII (antihemolytic factor A) from the platelets and endothelial cells combines with factor IX (antihemolytic factor B or plasma thromboplasmin) to form an enzyme complex that activates factor X (Stuart–Prower factor or thrombokinase), leading to the common pathway. The events in the intrinsic pathway are completed in a few minutes.

## Common Pathway

Both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways lead to the  **common pathway**, in which fibrin is produced to seal off the vessel. Once factor X has been activated by either the intrinsic or extrinsic pathway, the enzyme prothrombinase converts factor II, the inactive enzyme prothrombin, into the active enzyme  **thrombin**. (Note that if the enzyme thrombin were not normally in an inactive form, clots would form spontaneously, a condition not consistent with life.) Then, thrombin converts factor I, the soluble fibrinogen, into the insoluble fibrin protein strands. Factor XIII then stabilizes the fibrin clot.
