index: hide
name: The Formation of Solutions

The formation of a solution is an example of a  **spontaneous process**, a process that occurs under specified conditions without the requirement of energy from some external source. Sometimes a mixture is stirred to speed up the dissolution process, but this is not necessary; a homogeneous solution will form eventually. The topic of spontaneity is critically important to the study of chemical thermodynamics and is treated more thoroughly in a later chapter of this text. For purposes of this chapter’s discussion, it will suffice to consider two criteria that  *favor*, but do not guarantee, the spontaneous formation of a solution:

  1. a decrease in the internal energy of the system (an exothermic change, as discussed in the previous chapter on thermochemistry)
  2. an increased dispersal of matter in the system (which indicates an increase in the  *entropy* of the system, as you will learn about in the later chapter on thermodynamics)

In the process of dissolution, an internal energy change often, but not always, occurs as heat is absorbed or evolved. An increase in matter dispersal always results when a solution forms from the uniform distribution of solute molecules throughout a solvent.

When the strengths of the intermolecular forces of attraction between solute and solvent species in a solution are no different than those present in the separated components, the solution is formed with no accompanying energy change. Such a solution is called an  **ideal solution**. A mixture of ideal gases (or gases such as helium and argon, which closely approach ideal behavior) is an example of an ideal solution, since the entities comprising these gases experience no significant intermolecular attractions.

When containers of helium and argon are connected, the gases spontaneously mix due to diffusion and form a solution ({'Figure_11_1_HeArsol Figure 11.1.HeArsol}). The formation of this solution clearly involves an increase in matter dispersal, since the helium and argon atoms occupy a volume twice as large as that which each occupied before mixing.


{image:'Figure_11_1_HeArsol}
        

Ideal solutions may also form when structurally similar liquids are mixed. For example, mixtures of the alcohols methanol (CH<sub>3</sub>OH) and ethanol (C<sub>2</sub>H<sub>5</sub>OH) form ideal solutions, as do mixtures of the hydrocarbons pentane, C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>12</sub>, and hexane, C<sub>6</sub>H<sub>14</sub>. Placing methanol and ethanol, or pentane and hexane, in the bulbs shown in {'Figure_11_1_HeArsol Figure 11.1.HeArsol} will result in the same diffusion and subsequent mixing of these liquids as is observed for the He and Ar gases (although at a much slower rate), yielding solutions with no significant change in energy. Unlike a mixture of gases, however, the components of these liquid-liquid solutions do, indeed, experience intermolecular attractive forces. But since the molecules of the two substances being mixed are structurally very similar, the intermolecular attractive forces between like and unlike molecules are essentially the same, and the dissolution process, therefore, does not entail any appreciable increase or decrease in energy. These examples illustrate how increased matter dispersal alone can provide the driving force required to cause the spontaneous formation of a solution. In some cases, however, the relative magnitudes of intermolecular forces of attraction between solute and solvent species may prevent dissolution.

Three types of intermolecular attractive forces are relevant to the dissolution process: solute-solute, solvent-solvent, and solute-solvent. As illustrated in {'Figure_11_1_solusolv Figure 11.1.solusolv}, the formation of a solution may be viewed as a stepwise process in which energy is consumed to overcome solute-solute and solvent-solvent attractions (endothermic processes) and released when solute-solvent attractions are established (an exothermic process referred to as  **solvation**). The relative magnitudes of the energy changes associated with these stepwise processes determine whether the dissolution process overall will release or absorb energy. In some cases, solutions do not form because the energy required to separate solute and solvent species is so much greater than the energy released by solvation.


{image:'Figure_11_1_solusolv}
        

Consider the example of an ionic compound dissolving in water. Formation of the solution requires the electrostatic forces between the cations and anions of the compound (solute–solute) be overcome completely as attractive forces are established between these ions and water molecules (solute–solvent). Hydrogen bonding between a relatively small fraction of the water molecules must also be overcome to accommodate any dissolved solute. If the solute’s electrostatic forces are significantly greater than the solvation forces, the dissolution process is significantly endothermic and the compound may not dissolve to an appreciable extent. Calcium carbonate, the major component of coral reefs, is one example of such an “insoluble” ionic compound (see {'Figure_11_0_coralreef Figure 11.0.coralreef}). On the other hand, if the solvation forces are much stronger than the compound’s electrostatic forces, the dissolution is significantly exothermic and the compound may be highly soluble. A common example of this type of ionic compound is sodium chloride, commonly known as table salt.

As noted at the beginning of this module, spontaneous solution formation is favored, but not guaranteed, by exothermic dissolution processes. While many soluble compounds do, indeed, dissolve with the release of heat, some dissolve endothermically. Ammonium nitrate (NH<sub>4</sub>NO<sub>3</sub>) is one such example and is used to make instant cold packs for treating injuries like the one pictured in {'Figure_11_1_Icepack Figure 11.1.Icepack}. A thin-walled plastic bag of water is sealed inside a larger bag with solid NH<sub>4</sub>NO<sub>3</sub>. When the smaller bag is broken, a solution of NH<sub>4</sub>NO<sub>3</sub> forms, absorbing heat from the surroundings (the injured area to which the pack is applied) and providing a cold compress that decreases swelling. Endothermic dissolutions such as this one require a greater energy input to separate the solute species than is recovered when the solutes are solvated, but they are spontaneous nonetheless due to the increase in disorder that accompanies formation of the solution.


{image:'Figure_11_1_Icepack}
        

## Key Concepts and Summary

A solution forms when two or more substances combine physically to yield a mixture that is homogeneous at the molecular level. The solvent is the most concentrated component and determines the physical state of the solution. The solutes are the other components typically present at concentrations less than that of the solvent. Solutions may form endothermically or exothermically, depending upon the relative magnitudes of solute and solvent intermolecular attractive forces. Ideal solutions form with no appreciable change in energy.

## Chemistry End of Chapter Exercises
