index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.1
title: 11.1 - Introduction

This chapter describes current scientific expectations for ‘near-term’ climate. Here ‘near term’ refers to the period from the present to mid-century, during which the {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} to different {Topics.*Scenarios emissions scenarios} is generally similar. Greatest emphasis in this chapter is given to the period 2016–2035, though some information on projected changes before and after this period (up to mid-century) is also assessed. An assessment of the scientific literature relating to atmospheric composition (except carbon dioxide ({Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}), which is addressed in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12}) and air quality for the near-term and beyond to 2100 is also provided.

This emphasis on near-term climate arises from (1) a recognition of its importance to decision makers in government and industry; (2) an increase in the international research effort aimed at improving our understanding of near-term climate; and (3) a recognition that nearterm {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} are generally less sensitive to differences between future {Topics.*Emissions emissions} scenarios than are long-term projections. {Glossary.*Climate_prediction Climate prediction} on seasonal to multi-annual time scales require accurate estimates of the initial climate state with less dependence on changes in {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} over the period. On longer time scales climate projections rely on projections of {Glossary.*External_forcing external forcing} with little reliance on the initial state of internal variability. Estimates of near-term climate depend partly on the committed change (caused by the inertia of the oceans as they respond to historical external forcing), the time evolution of internally generated {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} and the future path of external forcing. Near-term climate is sensitive to rapid changes in some short-lived climate forcing agents ({cite.11.'Jacobson_and_Streets_2009}; {cite.11.'Wigley_et_al_2009}; {cite.11.'UNEP_and_WMO_2011}; {cite.11.'Shindell_et_al_2012b}).

The need for near-term climate information has spawned a new field of climate science: decadal climate prediction ({cite.11.'Smith_et_al_2007}; {cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2009b}, 2013d). The Coupled {Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) experimental protocol includes a sequence of nearterm predictions (1 to 10 years) where observation-based information is used to initialize the models used to produce the forecasts. The goal is to exploit the {Glossary.*Predictability predictability} of internally generated climate variability as well as that of the externally forced component. The result depends on the ability of current models to reproduce the observed variability as well as on the accurate depiction of the initial state (see {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}). Skilful multi-annual to decadal {Topics.*Climate_Predictions climate predictions} (in the technical sense of ‘skilful’ as outlined in 11.2.3.2 and {FAQ_11_1 FAQ 11.1}) are being produced although technical challenges remain that need to be overcome in order to improve skill. These challenges are now being addressed by the scientific community.

Climate change experiments with models that do not depend on initial condition but on the history and {Glossary.*Projection projection} of climate forcings (often referred to as ‘uninitialized’ or ‘non-initialized’ projections or simply as ‘projections’) are another component of CMIP5. Such projections have been the main focus of assessments of future climate in previous IPCC assessments and are considered in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12} to 14. The main focus of attention in past assessments has been on the properties of projections for the late 21st century and beyond. Projections also provide valuable information on externally forced changes to nearterm climate, however, and are an important {Glossary.*Source source} of information that complements information from the predictions. Projections are also assessed in this chapter.

The objectives of this chapter are to assess the state of the science concerning both near-term predictions and near-term projections. CMIP5 results are considered for the near term as are other published nearterm predictions and projections. The chapter consists of four major assessments:

1. The scientific basis for near-term prediction as reflected in estimates of predictability (see {Box_11_1 Box 11.1}), and the dynamical and physical mechanisms underpinning predictability, and the processes that limit predictability (see {Chapters.11.11_2 Section 11.2}).
2. The current state of knowledge in near-term prediction (see {Chapters.11.11_2 Section 11.2}). Here the emphasis is placed on the results from the decadal (10-year) multi-model prediction experiments in the CMIP5 database.
3. The current state of knowledge in near-term projection (see {Chapters.11.11_3 Section 11.3}). Here the emphasis is on what the climate in next few decades may look like relative to 1986–2005, based on near-term projections (i.e., the forced climatic response). The focus is on the ‘core’ near-term period (2016–2035), but some information prior to this period and out to mid-century is also discussed. A key issue is when, where and how the signal of externally forced climate change is expected to emerge from the background of natural climate variability.
4. Projected changes in atmospheric composition and air quality, and their interactions with climate change during the near term and beyond, including new findings from the Atmospheric Chemistry and Climate Model Intercomparison (ACCMIP) initiative.
