index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.4.2.2
title: 4.4.2.2 - Greenland

There is very high confidence that the Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} has lost ice and contributed to {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} rise over the last two decades ({cite.4.'Ewert_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Sasgen_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}). Recent GRACE results are in better agreement than in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} as discussed in {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_2.4_4_2_1 Section 4.4.2.1} ({cite.4.'Baur_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Velicogna_2009}; {cite.4.'Pritchard_et_al_2010}; {cite.4.'Wu_et_al_2010}; {cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'Schrama_and_Wouters_2011}). {Glossary.*Altimetry Altimetry} missions report losses comparable to those from the mass budget method and from the time-variable gravity method ({cite.4.'Thomas_et_al_2006}; {cite.4.'Zwally_et_al_2011}) ({'Figure_4_13 Figure 4.13}f).

{'Figure_4_15 Figure 4.15} shows the cumulative ice mass loss from the Greenland ice sheet over the period 1992–2012 derived from 18 recent studies made by 14 different research groups ({cite.4.'Baur_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Cazenave_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Slobbe_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Velicogna_2009}; {cite.4.'Pritchard_et_al_2010}; {cite.4.'Wu_et_al_2010}; {cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2011}; Rignot et al., 2011c; {cite.4.'Schrama_and_Wouters_2011}; {cite.4.'Sorensen_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'Zwally_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'Ewert_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Harig_and_Simons_2012}; {cite.4.'Sasgen_et_al_2012}). These studies do not include earlier estimates from the same researchers when those have been updated by more recent analyses using extended data. They include estimates made from satellite gravimetry, satellite altimetry and the mass budget method. Details of the studies used for Greenland are listed in Appendix Table 4.A.1 (additional studies not selected are listed in Table 4.A.2).

{image:'Figure_4_15}

The mass balance for each year is estimated as a simple average of all the selected estimates available for that particular year. {'Figure_4_15 Figure 4.15} shows an {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} of these estimates since an arbitrary zero on 1 January 1992. The number of estimates available varies with time, with as few as two estimates per year in the 1990s and up to 18 per year from 2004. The cumulative uncertainty in {'Figure_4_15 Figure 4.15} is based on the uncertainty cited in the original studies which, when the confidence level is not specifically given, is assumed to be at the 1 standard deviation (1σ) level. However, the annual estimates from different studies often do not overlap within the original {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}, and hence the error limits used in this assessment are derived from the absolute maximum and minimum mass balance estimate for each year. These have been converted to the 90% confidence interval (5 to 95%, or 1.65σ). The cumulative error is weighted by 1/√n , where n is the number of years accumulated.

Despite year-to-year differences between the various original analyses, this multi-study assessment yields very high confidence that Greenland has lost mass over the last two decades and high confidence that the rate of loss has increased. The increase is also shown in several individual studies ({cite.4.'Velicogna_2009}; {cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2011}; Rignot et al., 2011c; {cite.4.'Zwally_et_al_2011}) ({'Figure_4_13 Figure 4.13}a–c). The average ice mass change to Greenland from the present assessment has been –121 [–149 to –94] Gt yr–1 (a sea level equivalent of 0.33 [0.41 to 0.26] mm yr–1) over the period 1993 to 2010, and –229 [–290 to –169] Gt yr–1 (0.63 [0.80 to 0.47] mm yr–1 sea level equivalent) over the period 2005–2010.

Greenland changes that include and exclude peripheral glaciers cannot be cleanly separated from the mixture of studies and techniques in this assessment, but for the post 2003 period there is a prevalence of gravity studies, which do include the peripheral glaciers. Hence, although the estimated mass change in Greenland peripheral glaciers of –38 ± 7 Gt yr–1over the period 2003–2009 ({cite.4.'Gardner_et_al_2013}) is discussed in {Chapters.4.4_3.4_3_3 Section 4.3.3} ({'Table_4_5 Table 4.5}), these changes are included within the values for ice-sheet change quoted in this section, and not as part of the total mass change for glaciers.

A reconciliation of apparent disparities between the different satellite methods was made by the Ice-sheet Mass Balance Intercomparison Experiment (IMBIE) ({cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}). This intercomparison combined an {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of satellite altimetry, interferometry, airborne radio-echo sounding and airborne gravimetry data and regional atmospheric {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} output products, for common geographical regions and for common time intervals. Good agreement was obtained between the estimates from the different methods and, whereas the uncertainties of any method are sometimes large, the combination of methods considerably improves the overall certainty. (Note that {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012 Shepherd et al. (2012)} also cannot cleanly separate estimates including or excluding peripheral glaciers). For Greenland, {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012 Shepherd et al. (2012)} estimate a change in mass over the period 1992–2011, averaged across the ensemble for each method, of –142 ± 49 Gt yr–1 (0.39 ± 0.14 mm yr–1 of sea level rise). For the same period, this present assessment, which averages across individual studies, yields a slightly slower loss, with a rate of mass change of –125 ± 25 Gt yr–1 at the 90% confidence level (0.34 ± 0.07 mm yr–1 {Glossary.*Sea_level_equivalent SLE}). Averaging across technique ensembles in the present assessment yields a loss at a rate of –129 Gt yr–1 (0.36 mm). {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012 Shepherd et al. (2012)} confirm an increasing mass loss from Greenland, although they also identify mass balance variations over intermediate (2to 4-year) periods.

The mass budget method shows that ice loss from the Greenland ice sheet is partitioned in approximately similar amounts between surface mass balance (i.e., {Glossary.*Runoff runoff}) and discharge from ice flow across the {Glossary.*Grounding_line grounding line} (van den Broeke et al., 2009) (medium confidence). However, there are significant differences in the relative importance of ice discharge and surface mass balance in various regions of Greenland ({cite.4.'Howat_et_al_2007}; {cite.4.'Pritchard_et_al_2009}; van den Broeke et al., 2009; {cite.4.'Sasgen_et_al_2012}). Dynamic losses dominate in southeast and central west regions, and also influence losses in northwest Greenland, whereas in the central north, southwest and northeast sectors, changes in surface mass balance appear to dominate.

There is high confidence that over the last two decades, surface mass balance has become progressively more negative as a result of an increase in surface melt and runoff, and that ice discharge across the grounding line has also been enhanced due to the increased speed of some outlet glaciers. Altimetric measurements of surface height suggest slight inland thickening in 1994–2006 ({cite.4.'Thomas_et_al_2006}, 2009), but this is not confirmed by regional atmospheric climate model outputs for the period 1957–2009 ({cite.4.'Ettema_et_al_2009}), nor recent {Glossary.*Ice_core ice core} (see Glossary) data ({cite.4.'Buchardt_et_al_2012}), hence there is low confidence in an increase in precipitation in Greenland in recent decades. Probable changes in accumulation are, however, exceeded by the increased runoff especially since 2006 (van den Broeke et al., 2009). The four highest runoff years over the last 140 years occurred since 1995 ({cite.4.'Hanna_et_al_2011}).

The total surface melt area has continued to increase since AR4 and has accelerated in the past few years ({cite.4.'Fettweis_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'Tedesco_et_al_2011}), with an extreme melt event covering more than 90% of the ice sheet for a few days in July 2012 ({cite.4.'Nghiem_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Tedesco_et_al_2013}). Annual surface mass balance in 2011–2012 was 2 standard deviations (2σ) below the 2003–2012 mean. Such extreme melt events are rare and have been observed in ice core records only twice, once in 1889, and once more, seven centuries earlier in the {Glossary.*Medieval_Warm_Period Medieval Warm Period} ({cite.4.'Meese_et_al_1994}; {cite.4.'Alley_and_Anandakrishnan_1995}). Over the past decade, the surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} of the Greenland ice sheet has decreased by up to 18% in coastal regions, with a statistically significant increase over 87% of the ice sheet due to melting and snow metamorphism, allowing more solar energy to be absorbed for surface melting ({cite.4.'Box_et_al_2012}).

GRACE results show ice loss was largest in southeast Greenland during 2005 and increased in the northwest after 2007 ({cite.4.'Khan_et_al_2010a}; {cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'Schrama_and_Wouters_2011}; {cite.4.'Harig_and_Simons_2012}). Subsequent to 2005, ice loss decreased in the southeast. These GRACE results agree with measurements of ice discharge from the major outlet glaciers that confirm the dominance of dynamic losses in these regions (van den Broeke et al., 2009). In particular, major outlet {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} speed-up reported in AR4 occurred in west Greenland between 1996 and 2000 ({cite.4.'Rignot_and_Kanagaratnam_2006}) and in southeast Greenland from 2001 to 2006 ({cite.4.'Rignot_and_Kanagaratnam_2006}; {cite.4.'Joughin_et_al_2010b}). In the southeast, many outlet glaciers slowed after 2005 ({cite.4.'Howat_et_al_2007}; {cite.4.'Howat_et_al_2011}), with many flow speeds decreasing back towards those of the early 2000s ({cite.4.'Murray_et_al_2010}; {cite.4.'Moon_et_al_2012}), although most are still flowing faster and discharging more ice into the ocean than they did in 1996 ({cite.4.'Rignot_and_Kanagaratnam_2006}; {cite.4.'Howat_et_al_2011}).

In the northwest, the increase in the rate of ice loss from 1996–2006 to 2006–2010 was probably caused partially by a higher accumulation in the late 1990s compared to earlier and later years ({cite.4.'Sasgen_et_al_2012}), but ice dynamic changes also played a role as outlet glaciers in the northwest showed an increase in speed from 2000 to 2010, with the greatest increase from 2007 to 2010 ({cite.4.'Moon_et_al_2012}). Longer-term observations of surface topography in the northwest sector confirm the dynamic component of this mass loss and suggest two periods of loss in 1985–1993 and 2005–2010 separated by limited mass changes ({cite.4.'Kjaer_et_al_2012}). In the southeast, an 80-year long record reveals that many land-terminating glaciers retreated more rapidly in the 1930s compared to the 2000s, but marine-terminating glaciers retreated more rapidly during the recent warming (Bjørk et al., 2012).
