index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.3.6
title: 4.2.3.6 - Antarctic Land-Fast Ice

Land-fast ice forms around the coast of Antarctica, typically in narrow coastal bands of varying width up to 150 km from the coast and in water depths of up to 400 to 500 m. Around East Antarctica, it comprises generally between 5% (winter) and 35% (summer) of the overall {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} area ({cite.4.'Fraser_et_al_2012}), and a greater fraction of ice volume ({cite.4.'Giles_et_al_2008a}).

Variability in the distribution and extent of land-fast ice is sensitive to processes of ice formation and to processes such as ocean swell and waves, and strong wind events that cause the ice to break-up. Historical records of Antarctic land-fast ice extent, such as that of {cite.4.'Kozlovsky_et_al_1977 Kozlovsky et al. (1977)} covering 0° to 160°E, were limited by sparse and sporadic sampling. Recently, using cloud-free Moderate {Glossary.*Resolution Resolution} Imaging Spectrometer (MODIS) composite images, {cite.4.'Fraser_et_al_2012 Fraser et al. (2012)} derived a high-resolution time series of land-fast sea ice extent along the East Antarctic coast, showing a statistically significant increase (1.43 ± 0.30% yr–1) between March 2000 and December 2008. There is a strong increase in the Indian Ocean sector (20°E to 90°E, 4.07 ± 0.42% yr–1), and a non-significant decrease in the sector from 90°E to 160°E (–0.40 ± 0.37% yr–1). An apparent shift from a negative to a positive {Glossary.*Trend trend} was noted in the Indian Ocean sector from 2004, which coincided with greater interannual variability. Although significant changes are observed, this record is only 9 years in length.
