index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.2.2
title: 12.2.2 - General Concepts: Sources of Uncertainties

The understanding of the sources of uncertainty affecting future climate change {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} has not substantially changed since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, but many experiments and studies since then have proceeded to explore and characterize those {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} further. A full characterization, qualitative and even more so quantitative, involves much more than a measure of the range of model outcomes, because additional sources of information (e.g., observational constraints, model evaluation, expert judgement) lead us to expect that the uncertainty around the future climate state does not coincide straightforwardly with those ranges. In fact, in this chapter we highlight wherever relevant the distinction between model uncertainty evaluation, which encompasses the understanding that models have intrinsic shortcoming in fully and accurately representing the real system, and cannot all be considered independent of one another ({cite.12.'Knutti_et_al_2013}), and a simpler descriptive quantification, based on the range of outcomes from the {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of models.

Uncertainty affecting mid to long-term projections of climatic changes stems from distinct but possibly interacting sources. {'Figure_12_2 Figure 12.2} shows a schematic of the chain from scenarios, through {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} to projections. Uncertainties affecting near-term projections of which some aspect are also relevant for longer-term projections are discussed in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_1.11_3_1_1 Section 11.3.1.1} and shown in {'Figure_11_8 Figure 11.8}.

{image:'Figure_12_2}

Future {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs}, {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} particles and other forcing agents such as {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} are dependent on socioeconomic factors including global geopolitical agreements to control those emissions. Systematic studies that attempt to quantify the likely ranges of anthropogenic emission have been undertaken ({cite.12.'Sokolov_et_al_2009}) but it is more common to use a scenario approach of different but plausible—in the sense of technically feasible—pathways, leading to the concept of scenario uncertainty. AR4 made extensive use of the {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} ({cite.12.'IPCC_2000}) developed using a sequential approach, that is, socioeconomic factors feed into {Topics.*Scenarios emissions scenarios} which are then used either to directly force the {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} or to determine concentrations of GHGs and other agents required to drive these models. This report also assesses outcomes of simulations that use the new RCP scenarios, developed using a parallel process ({cite.12.'Moss_et_al_2010}) whereby different targets in terms of RF at 2100 were selected (2.6, 4.5, 6.0 and 8.5 W m–2) and GHG and aerosol emissions consistent with those targets, and their corresponding socioeconomic drivers were developed simultaneously (see {Chapters.12.12_3 Section 12.3}). Rather than being identified with one socioeconomic {Glossary.*Storyline storyline}, RCP scenarios are consistent with many possible economic futures (in fact, different combinations of GHG and aerosol emissions can lead to the same RCP). Their development was driven by the need to produce scenarios that could be input to climate model simulations more expediently while corresponding socioeconomic scenarios would be developed in parallel, and to produce a wide range of model responses that may be scaled and interpolated to estimate the response under other scenarios, involving different measures of adaptation and {Glossary.*Mitigation mitigation}.

In terms of the uncertainties related to the RCP emissions scenarios, the following issues can be identified:

- No probabilities or likelihoods have been attached to the alternative RCP scenarios (as was the case for SRES scenarios). Each of them should be considered plausible, as no study has questioned their technical feasibility (see {Chapters.1 Chapter 1}).
- Despite the naming of the {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} in terms of their target RF at 2100 or at stabilization ({Box_1_1 Box 1.1}), climate models translate concentrations of forcing agents into RF in different ways due to their different structural modelling assumptions. Hence a model simulation of RCP6.0 may not attain exactly a RF of 6 W m–2; more accurately, an RCP6.0 forced model experiment may not attain exactly the same RF as was intended by the specification of the RCP6.0 forcing inputs. Thus in addition to the scenario uncertainty there is RF uncertainty in the way the RCP scenarios are implemented in climate models.
- Some model simulations are concentration-driven (GHG concentrations are specified) whereas some models, which have Earth Systems components, convert emission scenarios into concentrations and are termed emissions-driven. Different ESMs driven by emissions may produce different concentrations of GHGs and aerosols because of differences in the representation and/or {Glossary.*Parameterization parameterization} of the processes responsible for the conversion of emissions into concentrations. This aspect may be considered a facet of forcing uncertainty, or may be compounded in the category of model uncertainty, which we discuss below. Also, aerosol loading and land use changes are not dictated intrinsically by the RCP specification. Rather, they are a result of the Integrated Assessment Model that created the emission pathway for a given RCP.

SRES and RCPs account for future changes only in anthropogenic forcings. With regard to solar forcing, the 1985–2005 {Glossary.*Solar_11_year_cycle solar cycle} is repeated. Neither projections of future deviations from this solar cycle, nor future volcanic RF and their uncertainties are considered.

Any climate {Glossary.*Projection projection} is subject to sampling uncertainties that arise because of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}. In this chapter, the {Topics.*Climate_Predictions prediction} of, for example, the amplitude or phase of some mode of variability that may be important on long time scales is not addressed (see Sections {Chapters.11.11_2 11.2} and {Chapters.11.11_3 11.3}). Any climate variable projection derived from a single simulation of an individual climate model will be affected by internal variability (stemming from the {Glossary.*Chaotic chaotic} nature of the system), whether it be a variable that involves a long time average (e.g., 20 years), a snapshot in time or some more complex diagnostic such as the variance computed from a time series over many years. No amount of time averaging can reduce internal variability to zero, although for some {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs} and simplified models, which may be used to reproduce the results of more complex model simulations, the representation of internal variability is excluded from the model specification by design. For different variables, and different spatial and time scale averages, the relative importance of internal variability in comparison with other sources of uncertainty will be different. In general, internal variability becomes more important on shorter time scales and for smaller scale variables (see {Chapters.11.11_3 Section 11.3} and {'Figure_11_2 Figure 11.2}). The concept of signal-to-noise ratio may be used to quantify the relative magnitude of the forced response (signal) versus internal variability (noise). Internal variability may be sampled and estimated explicitly by running ensembles of simulations with slightly different initial conditions, designed explicitly to represent internal variability, or can be estimated on the basis of long control runs where {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcings} are held constant. In the case of both multi-model and perturbed physics ensembles (see below), there is an implicit perturbation in the initial state of each run considered, which means that these ensembles sample both modelling uncertainty and internal variability jointly.

The ability of models to mimic nature is achieved by simplification choices that can vary from model to model in terms of the fundamental numeric and algorithmic structures, forms and values of parameterizations, and number and kinds of coupled processes included. Simplifications and the interactions between parameterized and resolved processes induce ‘errors’ in models, which can have a leading-order impact on projections. It is possible to characterize the choices made when building and running models into structural—indicating the numerical techniques used for solving the dynamical equations, the analytic form of parameterization schemes and the choices of inputs for fixed or varying boundary conditions—and parametric—indicating the choices made in setting the parameters that control the various components of the model. The community of climate modellers has regularly collaborated in producing coordinated experiments forming multi-model ensembles (MMEs), using both global and regional model families, for example, CMIP3/5 ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007a}), ENSEMBLES ({cite.12.'Johns_et_al_2011}) and Chemistry–Climate Model Validation 1 and 2 (CCM-Val-1 and 2; {cite.12.'Eyring_et_al_2005}), through which structural uncertainty can be at least in part explored by comparing models, and perturbed physics ensembles (PPEs, with e.g., Hadley Centre Coupled Model version 3 (HadCM3; {cite.12.'Murphy_et_al_2004}), Model for Interdiciplinary Research On Climate (MIROC; {cite.12.'Yokohata_et_al_2012}), Community {Topics.*Climate_System Climate System} Model 3 (CCSM3; {cite.12.'Jackson_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Sanderson_2011})), through which uncertainties in parameterization choices can be assessed in a given model. As noted below, neither MMEs nor PPEs represent an adequate sample of all the possible choices one could make in building a climate model. Also, current models may exclude some processes that could turn out to be important for projections (e.g., methane {Glossary.*Clathrate_methane clathrate} release) or produce a common error in the representation of a particular process. For this reason, it is of critical importance to distinguish two different senses in which the uncertainty terminology is used or misused in the literature (see also Sections {Chapters.1.1_4.1_4_2 1.4.2}, {Chapters.9.9_2.9_2_2 9.2.2}, {Chapters.9.9_2.9_2_3 9.2.3}, {Chapters.11.11_2.11_2_1 11.2.1} and {Chapters.11.11_2.11_2_2 11.2.2}). A narrow interpretation of the concept of model uncertainty often identifies it with the range of responses of a model ensemble. In this chapter this type of characterization is referred as model range or {Glossary.*Model_spread model spread}. A broader concept entails the recognition of a fundamental uncertainty in the representation of the real system that these models can achieve, given their necessary approximations and the limits in the scientific understanding of the real system that they encapsulate. When addressing this aspect and characterizing it, this chapter uses the term model uncertainty.

The relative role of the different sources of uncertainty—model, scenario and internal variability—as one moves from shortto midto long-term projections and considers different variables at different spatial scales has to be recognized (see {Chapters.11.11_3 Section 11.3}). The three sources exchange relevance as the time horizon, the spatial scale and the variable change. In absolute terms, internal variability is generally estimated, and has been shown in some specific studies ({cite.12.'Hu_et_al_2012}) to remain approximately constant across the forecast horizon, with model ranges and scenario/forcing variability increasing over time. For forecasts of global temperatures after mid-century, scenario and model ranges dominate the amount of variation due to internally generated variability, with scenarios accounting for the largest {Glossary.*Source source} of uncertainty in projections by the end of the century. For global average precipitation projections, scenario uncertainty has a much smaller role even by the end of the 21st century and model range maintains the largest share across all projection horizons. For temperature and precipitation projections at smaller spatial scales, internal variability may remain a significant source of uncertainty up until middle of the 21st century in some regions ({cite.12.'Hawkins_and_Sutton_2009}, 2011; {cite.12.'Rowell_2012}; Knutti and Sedláček, 2013). Within single model experiments, the persistently significant role of internally generated variability for regional projections even beyond shortand mid-term horizons has been documented by analyzing relatively large ensembles sampling initial conditions ({cite.12.'Deser_et_al_2012a}, 2012b).
