index: hide
name: Location and Connections of the Cerebellum

The cerebellum is located in apposition to the dorsal surface of the brain stem, centered on the pons. The name of the pons is derived from its connection to the cerebellum. The word means “bridge” and refers to the thick bundle of myelinated axons that form a bulge on its ventral surface. Those fibers are axons that project from the gray matter of the pons into the contralateral cerebellar cortex. These fibers make up the  **middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP)** and are the major physical connection of the cerebellum to the brain stem ({'Figure_16_5_1 Figure 16.5.1}). Two other white matter bundles connect the cerebellum to the other regions of the brain stem. The  **superior cerebellar peduncle (SCP)** is the connection of the cerebellum to the midbrain and forebrain. The  **inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP)** is the connection to the medulla.


{image:'Figure_16_5_1}
        

These connections can also be broadly described by their functions. The ICP conveys sensory input to the cerebellum, partially from the spinocerebellar tract, but also through fibers of the  **inferior olive**. The MCP is part of the  **cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway** that connects the cerebral cortex with the cerebellum and preferentially targets the lateral regions of the cerebellum. It includes a copy of the motor commands sent from the precentral gyrus through the corticospinal tract, arising from collateral branches that synapse in the gray matter of the pons, along with input from other regions such as the visual cortex. The SCP is the major output of the cerebellum, divided between the  **red nucleus** in the midbrain and the thalamus, which will return cerebellar processing to the motor cortex. These connections describe a circuit that compares motor commands and sensory feedback to generate a new output. These comparisons make it possible to coordinate movements. If the cerebral cortex sends a motor command to initiate walking, that command is copied by the pons and sent into the cerebellum through the MCP. Sensory feedback in the form of proprioception from the spinal cord, as well as vestibular sensations from the inner ear, enters through the ICP. If you take a step and begin to slip on the floor because it is wet, the output from the cerebellum—through the SCP—can correct for that and keep you balanced and moving. The red nucleus sends new motor commands to the spinal cord through the  **rubrospinal tract**.

The cerebellum is divided into regions that are based on the particular functions and connections involved. The midline regions of the cerebellum, the  **vermis** and  **flocculonodular lobe**, are involved in comparing visual information, equilibrium, and proprioceptive feedback to maintain balance and coordinate movements such as walking, or  **gait**, through the descending output of the red nucleus ({'Figure_16_5_2 Figure 16.5.2}). The lateral hemispheres are primarily concerned with planning motor functions through frontal lobe inputs that are returned through the thalamic projections back to the premotor and motor cortices. Processing in the midline regions targets movements of the axial musculature, whereas the lateral regions target movements of the appendicular musculature. The vermis is referred to as the  **spinocerebellum** because it primarily receives input from the dorsal columns and spinocerebellar pathways. The flocculonodular lobe is referred to as the  **vestibulocerebellum** because of the vestibular projection into that region. Finally, the lateral cerebellum is referred to as the  **cerebrocerebellum**, reflecting the significant input from the cerebral cortex through the cortico-ponto-cerebellar pathway.


{image:'Figure_16_5_2}
        
