index: hide
name: Foodborne Diseases

Prokaryotes are everywhere: They readily colonize the surface of any type of material, and food is not an exception. Outbreaks of bacterial infection related to food consumption are common. A  **foodborne disease** (colloquially called “food poisoning”) is an illness resulting from the consumption of food contaminated with pathogenic bacteria, viruses, or other parasites. Although the United States has one of the safest food supplies in the world, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has reported that “76 million people get sick, more than 300,000 are hospitalized, and 5,000 Americans die each year from foodborne illness.”<sup>http://www.cdc.gov/ecoli/2006/september, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Multi-state outbreak of E. coli O157:H7 infections from spinach,” September-October (2006).</sup>

The characteristics of foodborne illnesses have changed over time. In the past, it was relatively common to hear about sporadic cases of  **botulism**, the potentially fatal disease produced by a toxin from the anaerobic bacterium  *Clostridium botulinum*. A can, jar, or package created a suitable anaerobic environment where  *Clostridium* could grow. Proper sterilization and canning procedures have reduced the incidence of this disease.

Most cases of foodborne illnesses are now linked to produce contaminated by animal waste. For example, there have been serious, produce-related outbreaks associated with raw spinach in the United States and with vegetable sprouts in Germany ({'Figure_13_1_7ab Figure 13.1.7ab}). The raw spinach outbreak in 2006 was produced by the bacterium  *E. coli* strain O157:H7. Most  *E. coli* strains are not particularly dangerous to humans, (indeed, they live in our large intestine), but O157:H7 is potentially fatal.


{image:'Figure_13_1_7ab}
        

All types of food can potentially be contaminated with harmful bacteria of different species. Recent outbreaks of  *Salmonella* reported by the CDC occurred in foods as diverse as peanut butter, alfalfa sprouts, and eggs.
