index: hide
name: Using Prokaryotes to Clean up Our Planet: Bioremediation

Microbial  **bioremediation** is the use of prokaryotes (or microbial metabolism) to remove pollutants. Bioremediation has been used to remove agricultural chemicals (pesticides and fertilizers) that leach from soil into groundwater. Certain toxic metals, such as selenium and arsenic compounds, can also be removed from water by bioremediation. The reduction of <math display="" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"> <mrow>  <msubsup>   <mrow>    <mtext>SeO</mtext>   </mrow>   <mn>4</mn>   <mrow>    <msup>     <mn>2</mn>     <mo>−</mo>    </msup>       </mrow>  </msubsup>   </mrow></math>

 to <math display="" xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"> <mrow>  <msubsup>   <mrow>    <mtext>SeO</mtext>   </mrow>   <mn>3</mn>   <mrow>    <msup>     <mn>2</mn>     <mo>−</mo>    </msup>       </mrow>  </msubsup>   </mrow></math>
 and to Se<sup>0</sup> (metallic selenium) is a method used to remove selenium ions from water. Mercury is an example of a toxic metal that can be removed from an environment by bioremediation. Mercury is an active ingredient of some pesticides; it is used in industry and is also a byproduct of certain industries, such as battery production. Mercury is usually present in very low concentrations in natural environments but it is highly toxic because it accumulates in living tissues. Several species of bacteria can carry out the biotransformation of toxic mercury into nontoxic forms. These bacteria, such as  *Pseudomonas aeruginosa*, can convert Hg<sup>2+</sup> to Hg<sup>0</sup>, which is nontoxic to humans.

Probably one of the most useful and interesting examples of the use of prokaryotes for bioremediation purposes is the cleanup of oil spills. The importance of prokaryotes to petroleum bioremediation has been demonstrated in several oil spills in recent years, such as the Exxon Valdez spill in Alaska (1989) ({'Figure_13_1_9ab Figure 13.1.9ab}), the Prestige oil spill in Spain (2002), the spill into the Mediterranean from a Lebanon power plant (2006,) and more recently, the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico (2010). To clean up these spills, bioremediation is promoted by adding inorganic nutrients that help bacteria already present in the environment to grow. Hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria feed on the hydrocarbons in the oil droplet, breaking them into inorganic compounds. Some species, such as  *Alcanivorax borkumensis*, produce surfactants that solubilize the oil, while other bacteria degrade the oil into carbon dioxide. In the case of oil spills in the ocean, ongoing, natural bioremediation tends to occur, inasmuch as there are oil-consuming bacteria in the ocean prior to the spill. Under ideal conditions, it has been reported that up to 80 percent of the nonvolatile components in oil can be degraded within 1 year of the spill. Other oil fractions containing aromatic and highly branched hydrocarbon chains are more difficult to remove and remain in the environment for longer periods of time. Researchers have genetically engineered other bacteria to consume petroleum products; indeed, the first patent application for a bioremediation application in the U.S. was for a genetically modified oil-eating bacterium.


{image:'Figure_13_1_9ab}
        

## Prokaryotes in and on the Body

Humans are no exception when it comes to forming symbiotic relationships with prokaryotes. We are accustomed to thinking of ourselves as single organisms, but in reality, we are walking ecosystems. There are 10 to 100 times as many bacterial and archaeal cells inhabiting our bodies as we have cells in our bodies. Some of these are in mutually beneficial relationships with us, in which both the human host and the bacterium benefit, while some of the relationships are classified as  **commensalism**, a type of relationship in which the bacterium benefits and the human host is neither benefited nor harmed.

Human gut flora lives in the large intestine and consists of hundreds of species of bacteria and archaea, with different individuals containing different species mixes. The term “flora,” which is usually associated with plants, is traditionally used in this context because bacteria were once classified as plants. The primary functions of these prokaryotes for humans appear to be metabolism of food molecules that we cannot break down, assistance with the absorption of ions by the colon, synthesis of vitamin K, training of the infant immune system, maintenance of the adult immune system, maintenance of the epithelium of the large intestine, and formation of a protective barrier against pathogens.

The surface of the skin is also coated with prokaryotes. The different surfaces of the skin, such as the underarms, the head, and the hands, provide different habitats for different communities of prokaryotes. Unlike with gut flora, the possible beneficial roles of skin flora have not been well studied. However, the few studies conducted so far have identified bacteria that produce antimicrobial compounds as probably responsible for preventing infections by pathogenic bacteria.

Researchers are actively studying the relationships between various diseases and alterations to the composition of human microbial flora. Some of this work is being carried out by the Human Microbiome Project, funded in the United States by the National Institutes of Health.
