index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.1.2
title: 8.1.2 - Calculation of Radiative Forcing due to Concentration or Emission Changes

Analysis of forcing due to observed or modelled concentration changes between pre-industrial, defined here as 1750, and a chosen later year provides an indication of the importance of different forcing agents to climate change during that period. Such analyses have been a mainstay of climate assessments. This perspective has the advantage that observational data are available to accurately quantify the concentration changes for several of the largest forcing components. Atmospheric concentration changes, however, are the net result of variations in emissions of multiple compounds and any climate changes that have influenced processes such as wet removal, atmospheric chemistry or the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle}. Characterizing forcing according to concentration changes thus mixes multiple root causes along with climate feedbacks. Policy decisions are better informed by analysis of forcing attributable to emissions, which the IPCC first presented in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}. These analyses can be applied to historical emissions changes in a ‘backward-looking’ perspective, as done for example, for major {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs} (den Elzen et al., 2005; {cite.8.'Hohne_et_al_2011}) and NTCFs ({cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2009}), or to current or {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} future emissions in a ‘forward-looking’ view (see {Chapters.8.8_7 Section 8.7}). {Topics.*Emissions Emissions} estimates through time typically come from the scientific community, often making use of national reporting for recent decades.

With the greater use of emission-driven models, for example, in CMIP5, it is becoming more natural to estimate {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} resulting from emissions of a particular species rather than concentration-based forcing. Such calculations typically necessitate model simulations with chemical transport models or chemistry–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}, however, and require careful consideration of which processes are included, especially when comparing results to concentration-based {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}. In particular, simulation of concentration responses to emissions changes requires incorporating models of the carbon cycle and atmospheric chemistry (gas and {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} phases). The requisite expansion of the modelling realm for emissions-based forcing or emission metrics should in principle be consistent for all drivers. For example, as the response to aerosol or {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} precursor emissions includes atmospheric chemistry, the response to {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} emissions should as well. In addition, if the CO2 concentration responses to CO2 emissions include the impact of CO2-induced climate changes on carbon {Glossary.*Uptake uptake}, then the effect of climate changes caused by any other emission on carbon uptake should also be included. Similarly, if the effects of atmospheric CO2 concentration change on carbon uptake are included, the effects of other atmospheric composition or deposition changes on carbon uptake should be included as well (see also {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_1 Section 6.4.1}). Comparable issues are present for other forcing agents. In practice, the modelling realm used in studies of forcing attributable to emissions has not always been consistent. Furthermore, climate feedbacks have sometimes been included in the calculation of forcing due to ozone or aerosol changes, as when concentrations from a historical transient climate simulation are imposed for an ERF calculation. In this chapter, we endeavour to clarify which processes have been included in the various estimates of forcing {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to emissions (Sections {Chapters.8.8_3 8.3} and {Chapters.8.8_7 8.7}).

RF or ERF estimates based on either historical emissions or concentrations provide valuable insight into the relative and absolute contribution of various drivers to historical climate change. {Topics.*Scenarios Scenarios} of changing future emissions and land use are also developed based on various assumptions about socioeconomic trends and societal choices. The forcing resulting from such scenarios is used to understand the drivers of potential future climate changes (Sections {Chapters.8.8_5.8_5_3 8.5.3} and {Chapters.8.8_6 8.6}). As with historical forcings, the actual impact on climate depends on both the temporal and spatial structure of the forcings and the rate of response of various portions of the climate system.
