index: hide
name: Scatter Plots - Introduction

Before we take up the discussion of linear regression and correlation, we need to examine a way to display the relation between two variables  *x* and  *y*. The most common and easiest way is a  *scatter plot*. The following example illustrates a scatter plot.

A scatter plot shows the  *direction* of a relationship between the variables. A clear direction happens when there is either:


  * High values of one variable occurring with high values of the other variable or low values of one variable occurring with low values of the other variable.
  * High values of one variable occurring with low values of the other variable.

You can determine the  **strength** of the relationship by looking at the scatter plot and seeing how close the points are to a line, a power function, an exponential function,
or to some other type of function.  For a linear relationship there is an exception. Consider a scatter plot where all the points fall on a horizontal line providing a "perfect fit." The horizontal line would in fact show no relationship.

When you look at a scatterplot, you want to notice the  *overall pattern* and any  *deviations* from the pattern. The following scatterplot examples illustrate these concepts.


{image:'fig-ch12_4_2}
        


{image:'fig-ch12_4_3}
        


{image:'fig-ch12_4_4}
        

In this chapter, we are interested in scatter plots that show a linear pattern. Linear patterns are quite common. The linear relationship is strong if the points are close to a straight line,  except in the case of a horizontal line where there is no relationship. If we think that the points show a linear relationship, we would like to draw a line on the scatter plot. This line can be calculated through a process called  **linear regression**. However, we only calculate a regression line if one of the variables helps to explain or predict the other variable. If  *x* is the independent variable and  *y* the dependent variable,
then we can use a regression line to predict  *y* for a given value of  *x*
