index: hide
name: Genome Fusion and Eukaryote Evolution

Scientists believe the ultimate in HGT occurs through  **genome fusion** between different prokaryote species when two symbiotic organisms become endosymbiotic. This occurs when one species is taken inside another species' cytoplasm, which ultimately results in a genome consisting of genes from both the endosymbiont and the host. This mechanism is an aspect of the Endosymbiont Theory, which most biologists accept as the mechanism whereby eukaryotic cells obtained their mitochondria and chloroplasts. However, the role of endosymbiosis in developing the nucleus is more controversial. Scientists believe that nuclear and mitochondrial DNA have different (separate) evolutionary origins, with the mitochondrial DNA derived from the bacteria's circular genomes ancient prokaryotic cells engulfed. We can regard mitochondrial DNA as the smallest chromosome. Interestingly enough, mitochondrial DNA is inherited only from the mother. The mitochondrial DNA degrades in sperm when the sperm degrades in the fertilized egg or in other instances when the mitochondria located in the sperm's flagellum fails to enter the egg.

Within the past decade, James Lake of the UCLA/NASA Astrobiology Institute proposed that the genome fusion process is responsible for the evolution of the first eukaryotic cells ({'Figure_20_3_3 Figure 20.3.3} **a**). Using DNA analysis and a new mathematical algorithm, conditioned reconstruction (CR), his laboratory proposed that eukaryotic cells developed from an endosymbiotic gene fusion between two species, one an Archaea and the other a Bacteria. As mentioned, some eukaryotic genes resemble those of Archaea; whereas, others resemble those from Bacteria. An endosymbiotic fusion event, such as Lake has proposed, would clearly explain this observation. Alternatively, this work is new and the CR algorithm is relatively unsubstantiated, which causes many scientists to resist this hypothesis.

Lake's more recent work ({'Figure_20_3_3 Figure 20.3.3} **b**) proposes that gram-negative bacteria, which are unique within their domain in that they contain two lipid bilayer membranes, resulted from an endosymbiotic fusion of archaeal and bacterial species. The double membrane would be a direct result of the endosymbiosis, with the endosymbiont picking up the second membrane from the host as it was internalized. Scientists have also used this mechanism to explain the double membranes in mitochondria and chloroplasts. Lake’s work is not without skepticism, and the biological science community still debates his ideas. In addition to Lake’s hypothesis, there are several other competing theories as to the origin of eukaryotes. How did the eukaryotic nucleus evolve? One theory is that the prokaryotic cells produced an additional membrane that surrounded the bacterial chromosome. Some bacteria have the DNA enclosed by two membranes; however, there is no evidence of a nucleolus or nuclear pores. Other proteobacteria also have membrane-bound chromosomes. If the eukaryotic nucleus evolved this way, we would expect one of the two types of prokaryotes to be more closely related to eukaryotes.


{image:'Figure_20_3_3}
        

The  **nucleus-first** hypothesis proposes that the nucleus evolved in prokaryotes first ({'Figure_20_3_4 Figure 20.3.4} **a**), followed by a later fusion of the new eukaryote with bacteria that became mitochondria. The  **mitochondria-first** hypothesis proposes that mitochondria were first established in a prokaryotic host ({'Figure_20_3_4 Figure 20.3.4} **b**), which subsequently acquired a nucleus, by fusion or other mechanisms, to become the first eukaryotic cell. Most interestingly, the  **eukaryote-first** hypothesis proposes that prokaryotes actually evolved from eukaryotes by losing genes and complexity ({'Figure_20_3_4 Figure 20.3.4} **c**). All of these hypotheses are testable. Only time and more experimentation will determine which hypothesis data best supports.


{image:'Figure_20_3_4}
        
