index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.6
title: 4.6 - Lake and River Ice

The assessment of changes in lake and river ice is made more difficult by several factors. Until the satellite era, some nations collected data from numerous lakes and rivers and others none; many published studies focus on a single lake or river. Many records have been discontinued ({cite.4.'Prowse_et_al_2011}), and consistency of observational methods is a challenge, especially for date of ice break-up of ice on rivers when the process of break-up can take as long as 3 months ({cite.4.'Beltaos_and_Prowse_2009}).

The most comprehensive description is the analysis of 75 lakes, mostly in Scandinavia and the northern USA, but with one each in Switzerland and Russia ({cite.4.'Benson_et_al_2012}). Examining 150-, 100-, and 30-year periods ending in spring 2005, they found the most rapid changes in the most recent 30-year period (medium confidence) with trends in freeze-up 1.6 days per decade later and breakup 1.9 days per decade earlier. {cite.4.'Wang_et_al_2012 Wang et al. (2012)} found a total ice cover reduction on the north American Great Lakes of 71% over the 1973–2010 period of record, using weekly ice charts derived from satellite observations (medium confidence). {cite.4.'Jensen_et_al_2007 Jensen et al. (2007)} examined data from 65 water bodies in the Great Lakes {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} between Minnesota and New York (not including the Great Lakes themselves) and found trends in freeze-up 3.3 days per decade later, trends in breakup 2.1 days per decade earlier, and rates of change over 1975–2004 that were bigger than those over 1846–1995. Spatial patterns in trends are ambiguous: {cite.4.'Latifovic_and_Pouliot_2007 Latifovic and Pouliot (2007)} found larger trends in higher latitudes over Canada, but {cite.4.'Hodgkins_et_al_2002 Hodgkins et al. (2002)} found larger trends in lower latitudes in the northeastern USA.

In the only reported study since the 1990s of ice on SH lakes, {cite.4.'Green_2011 Green (2011)} suggested on the basis of available evidence that break-up of ice cover on Blue Lake in the Snowy Mountains of Australia had shifted from November to October between observation periods 1970–1972 and 1998–2010.

Several studies made quantitative connections between ice cover and temperature. For instance, {cite.4.'Benson_et_al_2012 Benson et al. (2012)} found significant correlations between mean ice duration and mean NH land air temperature in fall-winter-spring (r2 = 0.48) and between spring air temperature and breakup (r2 = 0.36); see also the review by {cite.4.'Prowse_et_al_2011 Prowse et al. (2011)}.

Studies of changes in river ice have used both disparate data and time intervals, ranging in duration from multi-decade to more than two centuries, and most focus on a single river. {cite.4.'Beltaos_and_Prowse_2009 Beltaos and Prowse (2009)}, summarizing most available information for northern rivers, noted an almost universal {Glossary.*Trend trend} towards earlier break-up dates but considerable spatial variability in those for freeze-up, and noted too that changes were often more pronounced during the last few decades of the 20th century. They noted that the 20th century increase in mean air temperature in spring and autumn has produced in many areas a change of about 10 to 15 days toward earlier break-up and later freeze-up, although the relationship with air temperatures is complicated by the roles of snow {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} and spring {Glossary.*Runoff runoff}.

In summary, the limited evidence available for freshwater (lake and river) ice indicates that ice duration is decreasing and average seasonal ice cover shrinking (low confidence), and the following general patterns (each of which has exceptions): rates of change in timing are generally, but not universally, (1) higher for spring breakup than fall freeze-up; (2) higher for more recent periods; (3) higher at higher elevations ({cite.4.'Jensen_et_al_2007}) and (4) quantitatively related to temperature changes.
