index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2
title: 4.2.2 - Arctic Sea Ice

Regional sea ice observations, which span more than a century, have revealed significant interannual changes in sea ice coverage ({cite.4.'Walsh_and_Chapman_2001}). Since the advent of satellite multichannel passive microwave imaging systems in 1979, which now provide more than 34 years of continuous coverage, it has been possible to monitor the entire extent of sea ice with a temporal {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} of less than a day. A number of procedures have been used to convert the observed microwave brightness temperature into sea ice concentration— the fractional area of the ocean covered by ice—and thence to derive sea ice extent and area ({cite.4.'Markus_and_Cavalieri_2000}; {cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008}). {Glossary.*Sea_ice Sea ice} extent is defined as the sum of ice covered areas with concentrations of at least 15%, while ice area is the product of the ice concentration and area of each data element within the ice extent. A brief description of the different techniques for deriving sea ice concentration is provided in the Supplementary Material. The trends in the sea ice concentration, ice extent and ice area, as inferred from data derived from the different techniques, are generally compatible. A comparison of derived ice extents from different sources is presented in the next section and in the Supplementary Material. Results presented in this assessment are based primarily on a single technique ({cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008}) but the use of data from other techniques would provide generally the same conclusions.

Arctic sea ice cover varies seasonally, with average ice extent varying between about 6 × 106 km2 in the summer and about 15 × 106 km2 in the winter ({cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008}; {cite.4.'Cavalieri_and_Parkinson_2012}; {cite.4.'Meier_et_al_2012}). The summer ice cover is confined to mainly the Arctic Ocean basin and the Canadian Arctic Archipelago, while winter sea ice reaches as far south as 44°N, into the peripheral seas. At the end of summer, the Arctic sea ice cover consists primarily of the previously thick, old and ridged ice types that survived the melt period. Interannual variability is largely determined by the extent of the ice cover in the peripheral seas in winter and by the ice cover that survives the summer melt in the Arctic Basin.
