index: hide
name: Taxonomy of Protists

The protists are a  **polyphyletic** group, meaning they lack a shared evolutionary origin. Since the current taxonomy is based on evolutionary history (as determined by biochemistry, morphology, and genetics), protists are scattered across many different taxonomic groups within the domain Eukarya. Eukarya is currently divided into six  **supergroups** that are further divided into subgroups, as illustrated in ({'Figure_5_1_taxon Figure 5.1.taxon}). In this section, we will primarily be concerned with the supergroups  **Amoebozoa**,  **Excavata**, and  **Chromalveolata**; these supergroups include many protozoans of clinical significance. The supergroups  **Opisthokonta** and  **Rhizaria** also include some protozoans, but few of clinical significance. In addition to protozoans, Opisthokonta also includes animals and fungi, some of which we will discuss in <link:> and <link:>. Some examples of the Archaeplastida will be discussed in <link:>. {'Figure_5_1_groups1 Figure 5.1.groups1} and {'Figure_5_1_groups2 Figure 5.1.groups2} summarize the characteristics of each supergroup and subgroup and list representatives of each.


{image:'Figure_5_1_taxon}
        


{image:'Figure_5_1_groups1}
        


{image:'Figure_5_1_groups2}
        

## Amoebozoa

The supergroup  **Amoebozoa** includes protozoans that use amoeboid movement. Actin microfilaments produce  **pseudopodia**, into which the remainder of the protoplasm flows, thereby moving the organism. The genus  **Entamoeba** includes commensal or parasitic species, including the medically important  *E. histolytica*, which is transmitted by cysts in feces and is the primary cause of  **amoebic dysentery**. The notorious “brain-eating amoeba,”  **Naegleria fowleri**, is also classified within the Amoebozoa. This deadly parasite is found in warm, fresh water and causes  **primary amoebic meningoencephalitis (PAM)**. Another member of this group is  **Acanthamoeba**, which can cause  **keratitis** (corneal inflammation) and blindness.

The  **Eumycetozoa** are an unusual group of organisms called  **slime molds**, which have previously been classified as animals, fungi, and plants ({'Figure_5_1_slime Figure 5.1.slime}). Slime molds can be divided into two types:  **cellular slime molds** and  **plasmodial slime molds**. The cellular slime molds exist as individual amoeboid cells that periodically aggregate into a mobile slug. The aggregate then forms a fruiting body that produces haploid spores. Plasmodial slime molds exist as large, multinucleate amoeboid cells that form reproductive stalks to produce spores that divide into gametes. One cellular slime mold,  **Dictyostelium discoideum**, has been an important study organism for understanding cell differentiation, because it has both single-celled and multicelled life stages, with the cells showing some degree of differentiation in the multicelled form. {'Figure_5_1_CellularLC Figure 5.1.CellularLC} and {'Figure_5_1_PlasmodiLC Figure 5.1.PlasmodiLC} illustrate the life cycles of cellular and plasmodial slime molds, respectively.


{image:'Figure_5_1_slime}
        


{image:'Figure_5_1_CellularLC}
        


{image:'Figure_5_1_PlasmodiLC}
        

## Chromalveolata

The supergroup  **Chromalveolata** is united by similar origins of its members’ plastids and includes the apicomplexans, ciliates,  **diatoms**, and  **dinoflagellates**, among other groups (we will cover the diatoms and dinoflagellates in <link:>). The  **apicomplexans** are intra- or extracellular parasites that have an  **apical complex** at one end of the cell. The apical complex is a concentration of organelles, vacuoles, and microtubules that allows the parasite to enter host cells ({'Figure_5_1_apical Figure 5.1.apical}). Apicomplexans have complex life cycles that include an infective sporozoite that undergoes  **schizogony** to make many merozoites (see the example in {'Figure_5_1_Trophozoit Figure 5.1.Trophozoit}). Many are capable of infecting a variety of animal cells, from insects to livestock to humans, and their life cycles often depend on transmission between multiple hosts. The genus  **Plasmodium** is an example of this group.


{image:'Figure_5_1_apical}
        

Other apicomplexans are also medically important.  **Cryptosporidium parvum** causes intestinal symptoms and can cause epidemic diarrhea when the cysts contaminate drinking water.  **Theileria (Babesia) microti**, transmitted by the tick  **Ixodes scapularis**, causes recurring fever that can be fatal and is becoming a common transfusion-transmitted pathogen in the United States ( *Theileria* and  *Babesia* are closely related genera and there is some debate about the best classification). Finally,  **Toxoplasma gondii** causes  **toxoplasmosis** and can be transmitted from cat feces, unwashed fruit and vegetables, or from undercooked meat. Because toxoplasmosis can be associated with serious birth defects, pregnant women need to be aware of this risk and use caution if they are exposed to the feces of potentially infected cats. A national survey found the frequency of individuals with antibodies for toxoplasmosis (and thus who presumably have a current latent infection) in the United States to be 11%. Rates are much higher in other countries, including some developed countries. There is also evidence and a good deal of theorizing that the parasite may be responsible for altering infected humans’ behavior and personality traits.

The ciliates (Ciliaphora), also within the Chromalveolata, are a large, very diverse group characterized by the presence of  **cilia** on their cell surface. Although the cilia may be used for locomotion, they are often used for feeding, as well, and some forms are nonmotile.  **Balantidium coli** ({'Figure_5_1_balan Figure 5.1.balan}) is the only parasitic ciliate that affects humans by causing intestinal illness, although it rarely causes serious medical issues except in the immunocompromised (those having a weakened immune system). Perhaps the most familiar ciliate is  **Paramecium**, a motile organism with a clearly visible  **cytostome** and  **cytoproct** that is often studied in biology laboratories ({'Figure_5_1_param Figure 5.1.param}). Another ciliate,  **Stentor**, is sessile and uses its cilia for feeding ({'Figure_5_1_stentor Figure 5.1.stentor}). Generally, these organisms have a  **micronucleus** that is diploid, somatic, and used for sexual reproduction by conjugation. They also have a  **macronucleus** that is derived from the micronucleus; the macronucleus becomes polyploid (multiple sets of duplicate chromosomes), and has a reduced set of metabolic genes.

Ciliates are able to reproduce through  **conjugation**, in which two cells attach to each other. In each cell, the diploid micronuclei undergo meiosis, producing eight haploid nuclei each. Then, all but one of the haploid micronuclei and the macronucleus disintegrate; the remaining (haploid) micronucleus undergoes mitosis. The two cells then exchange one micronucleus each, which fuses with the remaining micronucleus present to form a new, genetically different, diploid micronucleus. The diploid micronucleus undergoes two mitotic divisions, so each cell has four micronuclei, and two of the four combine to form a new macronucleus. The chromosomes in the macronucleus then replicate repeatedly, the macronucleus reaches its polyploid state, and the two cells separate. The two cells are now genetically different from each other and from their previous versions.


{image:'Figure_5_1_balan}
        


{image:'Figure_5_1_param}
        


{image:'Figure_5_1_stentor}
        

Öomycetes have similarities to fungi and were once classified with them. They are also called  **water molds**. However, they differ from fungi in several important ways. Öomycetes have cell walls of cellulose (unlike the chitinous cell walls of fungi) and they are generally diploid, whereas the dominant life forms of fungi are typically haploid.  **Phytophthora**, the plant pathogen found in the soil that caused the  **Irish potato famine**, is classified within this group ({'Figure_5_1_watermold Figure 5.1.watermold}).


{image:'Figure_5_1_watermold}
        

## Excavata

The third and final supergroup to be considered in this section is the Excavata, which includes primitive eukaryotes and many parasites with limited metabolic abilities. These organisms have complex cell shapes and structures, often including a depression on the surface of the cell called an excavate. The group Excavata includes the subgroups  **Fornicata**,  **Parabasalia**, and  **Euglenozoa**. The Fornicata lack mitochondria but have flagella. This group includes  **Giardia lamblia** (also known as  *G. intestinalis* or  *G. duodenalis)*, a widespread pathogen that causes diarrheal illness and can be spread through cysts from feces that contaminate water supplies ({'Figure_5_1_giardia Figure 5.1.giardia}). Parabasalia are frequent animal endosymbionts; they live in the guts of animals like termites and cockroaches. They have basal bodies and modified mitochondria (kinetoplastids). They also have a large, complex cell structure with an undulating membrane and often have many flagella. The trichomonads (a subgroup of the Parabasalia) include pathogens such as  **Trichomonas vaginalis**, which causes the human sexually transmitted disease  **trichomoniasis**. Trichomoniasis often does not cause symptoms in men, but men are able to transmit the infection. In women, it causes vaginal discomfort and discharge and may cause complications in pregnancy if left untreated.

The Euglenozoa are common in the environment and include photosynthetic and nonphotosynthetic species. Members of the genus  **Euglena** are typically not pathogenic. Their cells have two flagella, a  **pellicle**, a  **stigma** (eyespot) to sense light, and chloroplasts for photosynthesis ({'Figure_5_1_Euglenozoa Figure 5.1.Euglenozoa}). The pellicle of  *Euglena* is made of a series of protein bands surrounding the cell; it supports the cell membrane and gives the cell shape.

The Euglenozoa also include the trypanosomes, which are parasitic pathogens. The genus  **Trypanosoma** includes  *T. brucei*, which causes  **African trypanosomiasis** ( **African sleeping sickness** and  *T. cruzi*, which causes American trypanosomiasis ( **Chagas disease**). These tropical diseases are spread by insect bites. In African sleeping sickness,  *T. brucei* colonizes the blood and the brain after being transmitted via the bite of a tsetse fly ( *Glossina* spp.) ({'Figure_5_1_tryplife Figure 5.1.tryplife}). The early symptoms include confusion, difficulty sleeping, and lack of coordination. Left untreated, it is fatal.


{image:'Figure_5_1_Euglenozoa}
        


{image:'Figure_5_1_tryplife}
        

Chagas’ disease originated and is most common in Latin America. The disease is transmitted by  *Triatoma* spp., insects often called “kissing bugs,” and affects either the heart tissue or tissues of the digestive system. Untreated cases can eventually lead to heart failure or significant digestive or neurological disorders.

The genus  **Leishmania** includes trypanosomes that cause disfiguring skin disease and sometimes systemic illness as well.
