index: hide
name: Characteristics of Protists

The word  *protist* is a historical term that is now used informally to refer to a diverse group of microscopic eukaryotic organisms. It is not considered a formal taxonomic term because the organisms it describes do not have a shared evolutionary origin. Historically, the  **protists** were informally grouped into the “animal-like”  **protozoans**, the “plant-like”  **algae**, and the “fungus-like” protists such as  **water molds**. These three groups of protists differ greatly in terms of their basic characteristics. For example, algae are photosynthetic organisms that can be unicellular or multicellular. Protozoa, on the other hand, are nonphotosynthetic, motile organisms that are always unicellular. Other informal terms may also be used to describe various groups of protists. For example, microorganisms that drift or float in water, moved by currents, are referred to as  **plankton**. Types of plankton include  **zooplankton**, which are motile and nonphotosynthetic, and  **phytoplankton**, which are photosynthetic.

Protozoans inhabit a wide variety of habitats, both aquatic and terrestrial. Many are free-living, while others are parasitic, carrying out a life cycle within a host or hosts and potentially causing illness. There are also beneficial symbionts that provide metabolic services to their hosts. During the feeding and growth part of their life cycle, they are called  **trophozoite** **s**; these feed on small particulate food sources such as bacteria. While some types of protozoa exist exclusively in the trophozoite form, others can develop from trophozoite to an encapsulated cyst stage when environmental conditions are too harsh for the trophozoite. A  **cyst** is a cell with a protective wall, and the process by which a trophozoite becomes a cyst is called  **encystment**. When conditions become more favorable, these cysts are triggered by environmental cues to become active again through  **excystment**.

One protozoan genus capable of encystment is  **Eimeria**, which includes some human and animal pathogens. {'Figure_5_1_Trophozoit Figure 5.1.Trophozoit} illustrates the life cycle of  *Eimeria*.


{image:'Figure_5_1_Trophozoit}
        

Protozoans have a variety of reproductive mechanisms. Some protozoans reproduce asexually and others reproduce sexually; still others are capable of both sexual and asexual reproduction. In protozoans, asexual reproduction occurs by binary fission, budding, or schizogony. In  **schizogony**, the nucleus of a cell divides multiple times before the cell divides into many smaller cells. The products of schizogony are called merozoites and they are stored in structures known as schizonts. Protozoans may also reproduce sexually, which increases genetic diversity and can lead to complex life cycles. Protozoans can produce haploid gametes that fuse through  **syngamy**. However, they can also exchange genetic material by joining to exchange DNA in a process called  **conjugation**. This is a different process than the conjugation that occurs in bacteria. The term  **protist conjugation** refers to a true form of eukaryotic sexual reproduction between two cells of different mating types. It is found in  **ciliate** **s**, a group of protozoans, and is described later in this subsection.

All protozoans have a plasma membrane, or  **plasmalemma**, and some have bands of protein just inside the membrane that add rigidity, forming a structure called the  **pellicle**. Some protists, including protozoans, have distinct layers of cytoplasm under the membrane. In these protists, the outer gel layer (with microfilaments of actin) is called the  **ectoplasm**. Inside this layer is a sol (fluid) region of cytoplasm called the  **endoplasm**. These structures contribute to complex cell shapes in some protozoans, whereas others (such as amoebas) have more flexible shapes ({'Figure_5_1_locom Figure 5.1.locom}).

Different groups of protozoans have specialized feeding structures. They may have a specialized structure for taking in food through phagocytosis, called a  **cytostome**, and a specialized structure for the exocytosis of wastes called a  **cytoproct**. Oral grooves leading to cytostomes are lined with hair-like cilia to sweep in food particles. Protozoans are heterotrophic. Protozoans that are  **holozoic** ingest whole food particles through phagocytosis. Forms that are  **saprozoic** ingest small, soluble food molecules.

Many protists have whip-like  **flagella** or hair-like  **cilia** made of  **microtubules** that can be used for locomotion ({'Figure_5_1_locom Figure 5.1.locom}). Other protists use cytoplasmic extensions known as  **pseudopodia** (“false feet”) to attach the cell to a surface; they then allow cytoplasm to flow into the extension, thus moving themselves forward.

Protozoans have a variety of unique organelles and sometimes lack organelles found in other cells. Some have  **contractile vacuole** **s**, organelles that can be used to move water out of the cell for osmotic regulation (salt and water balance) ({'Figure_5_1_locom Figure 5.1.locom}). Mitochondria may be absent in parasites or altered to  **kinetoplastids** (modified mitochondria) or  **hydrogenosomes** (see <link:> for more discussion of these structures).


{image:'Figure_5_1_locom}
        
