index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.1.6
title: 8.7.1.6 - Synthesis

In the application and evaluation of metrics, it is important to distinguish between two main sources of variation in {Glossary.*Metric metric} values. While scientific choices of input data have to be made, there are also choices involving value judgements. For some metrics such choices are not always explicit and transparent. The choice of metric type and time horizon will for many components have a much larger effect than improved estimates of input parameters and can have strong effects on perceived impacts of {Topics.*Emissions emissions} and abatement strategies.

In addition to progress in understanding of {Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP}, new concepts have been introduced or further explored since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}. Time variant metrics introduce more dynamical views of the temporal contributions that accounts for the proximity to a prescribed target (in contrast to the traditional static GWP). Time variant metrics can be presented in a format that makes changing metric values over time predictable.

As metrics use parameters further down the cause effect chain the metrics become in general more policy relevant, but at the same time the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} increase. Furthermore, metrics that account for regional variations in sensitivity to emissions or regional variation in response could give a very different emphasis to various emissions. Many species, especially NTCFs, produce distinctly regionally heterogeneous {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF} and {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} patterns. These aspects are not accounted for in the commonly used global scale metrics.

The GWPs and GTPs have had inconsistent treatment of indirect effects and feedbacks. The GWPs reported in AR4 include climate–carbon feedbacks for the reference gas {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} but not for the non-CO2 gases. Such feedbacks may have significant impacts on metrics and should be treated consistently. More studies are needed to assess the importance of consistent treatment of indirect effects/feedbacks in metrics.

The weighting of effects over time—choice of time horizon in the case of GWP and GTP—is value based. Discounting is an alternative, which also includes value judgements and is equally controversial. The weighting used in the GWP is a weight equal to one up to the time horizon and zero thereafter, which is not in line with common approaches for evaluation of future effects in economics (e.g., as in WGIII, {Chapters.3 Chapter 3}). Adoption of a fixed horizon of e.g., 20, 100 or 500 years will inevitably put no weight on the long-term effect of CO2 beyond the time horizon ({'Figure_8_28 Figure 8.28} and {Box_6_1 Box 6.1}). While GWP integrates the effects up to a chosen time horizon the GTP gives the temperature just for one chosen year with no weight on years before or after. The most appropriate metric depends on the particular application and which aspect of climate change is considered relevant in a given context. The GWP is not directly related to a temperature limit such as the 2°C target ({cite.8.'Manne_and_Richels_2001}; {cite.8.'Shine_et_al_2007}; {cite.8.'Manning_and_Reisinger_2011}; {cite.8.'Smith_et_al_2012}; {cite.8.'Tol_et_al_2012}; {cite.8.'Tanaka_et_al_2013}), whereas some economic metrics and physical end-point metrics like the GTP may be more suitable for this purpose.

To provide metrics that can be useful to the users and policymakers a more effective dialog and discussion on three topics is needed: (1) which applications particular metrics are meant to serve; (2) how comprehensive metrics need to be in terms of indirect effects and feedbacks, and economic dimensions; and—related to this (3) how important it is to have simple and transparent metrics (given by analytical formulations) versus more complex model-based and thus model-dependent metrics. These issues are also important to consider in a wider disciplinary context (e.g., across the IPCC Working Groups). Finally, it is important to be aware that all metric choices, even ‘traditional’ or ‘widely used’ metrics, contain implicit value judgements as well as large uncertainties.
