index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 14.7.4
title: 14.7.4 - Tropospheric Biennial Oscillation

The Tropospheric Biennial Oscillation (TBO; {cite.14.'Meehl_1997}) is a proposed mechanism for the biennial tendency in large-scale {Glossary.*Drought drought} and floods of south Asia and Australia. Multiple studies imply that TBO involves the Asian-Australian {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon}, the {Glossary.*Indian_Ocean_Dipole IOD} and {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} (Sections {Chapters.14.14_2.14_2_2 14.2.2}, {Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_3 14.3.3} and {Chapters.14.14_4 14.4}; see also Supplementary Material Section 14.SM.5.2).

The IPO ({Chapters.14.14_7.14_7_3 Section 14.7.3}) affects the decade-to-decade strength of the TBO. A major contributor to recent change in the TBO comes from increase of {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} in the Indian Ocean that contributes to stronger trade winds in the Pacific, one of the processes previously identified with strengthening the TBO ({cite.14.'Meehl_and_Arblaster_2012}). Thus, prediction of decadal variability assessed in {Chapters.11 Chapter 11} that can be associated, for example, with the IPO (e.g., {cite.14.'Meehl_et_al_2010}) can influence the accuracy of shorter-term {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} of the TBO across the entire Indo-Pacific region ({cite.14.'Turner_et_al_2011}), but the relevance for longer time scales is uncertain.

Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, little work has been done to document the ability of {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} to simulate the TBO. However, {cite.14.'Li_et_al_2012b Li et al. (2012b)} showed that there is an overall improvement in the seasonality of monsoons rainfall related to changes in the TBO from CMIP3 to CMIP5, with most CMIP5 models better simulating both the monsoon timing and the very low rainfall rates outside of the monsoon season (see also {Chapters.14.14_2.14_2_2 Section 14.2.2}). In addition they concluded that the India-Australia link seems to be robust in all models.

With regard to possible future behaviour of the TBO, no analysis using multiple {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} has been made since the AR4. In models that more accurately simulate the TBO in the present-day climate, the TBO strengthens in a future warmer climate ({cite.14.'Nanjundiah_et_al_2005}). However, as with ENSO ({Chapters.14.14_4 Section 14.4}) and IOD ({Chapters.14.14_3.14_3_3 Section 14.3.3}), internally generated decadal variability complicates the interpretation of such future changes. Therefore, it remains unclear how future changes in the TBO will emerge and how this may influence {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} in the future. Confidence in the {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} future changes in TBO remains low.
