index: hide
name: Isoprenoids and Sterols

The  **isoprenoids** are branched lipids, also referred to as  **terpenoids**, that are formed by chemical modifications of the  **isoprene** molecule ({'Figure_7_3_isoprene Figure 7.3.isoprene}). These lipids play a wide variety of physiological roles in plants and animals, with many technological uses as pharmaceuticals (capsaicin), pigments (e.g., orange beta carotene, xanthophylls), and fragrances (e.g., menthol, camphor, limonene [lemon fragrance], and pinene [pine fragrance]). Long-chain isoprenoids are also found in  **hydrophobic** oils and  **waxes**. Waxes are typically water resistant and hard at room temperature, but they soften when heated and liquefy if warmed adequately. In humans, the main wax production occurs within the sebaceous glands of hair follicles in the skin, resulting in a secreted material called sebum, which consists mainly of triacylglycerol, wax esters, and the hydrocarbon squalene. There are many bacteria in the microbiota on the skin that feed on these lipids. One of the most prominent bacteria that feed on lipids is  *Propionibacterium acnes*, which uses the skin’s lipids to generate short-chain fatty acids and is involved in the production of acne.


{image:'Figure_7_3_isoprene}
        

Another type of lipids are  **steroid** **s**, complex, ringed structures that are found in cell membranes; some function as hormones. The most common types of steroids are  **sterol** **s**, which are steroids containing an OH group. These are mainly  **hydrophobic** molecules, but also have hydrophilic  **hydroxyl group**s. The most common sterol found in animal tissues is  **cholesterol**. Its structure consists of four rings with a double bond in one of the rings, and a hydroxyl group at the sterol-defining position. The function of cholesterol is to strengthen cell membranes in eukaryotes and in bacteria without cell walls, such as  *Mycoplasma*. Prokaryotes generally do not produce cholesterol, although bacteria produce similar compounds called  **hopanoids**, which are also multiringed structures that strengthen bacterial membranes ({'Figure_7_3_sterols Figure 7.3.sterols}). Fungi and some protozoa produce a similar compound called  **ergosterol**, which strengthens the cell membranes of these organisms.


{image:'Figure_7_3_sterols}
        
