index: hide
name: Phospholipids and Biological Membranes

Triglycerides are classified as simple lipids because they are formed from just two types of compounds:  **glycerol** and  **fatty acids**. In contrast, complex lipids contain at least one additional component, for example, a phosphate group ( **phospholipid** **s**) or a carbohydrate moiety ( **glycolipid** **s**). {'Figure_7_3_phospholip Figure 7.3.phospholip} depicts a typical phospholipid composed of two fatty acids linked to glycerol (a  **diglyceride**). The two fatty acid carbon chains may be both saturated, both unsaturated, or one of each. Instead of another fatty acid molecule (as for triglycerides), the third binding position on the glycerol molecule is occupied by a modified phosphate group.


{image:'Figure_7_3_phospholip}
        

The molecular structure of lipids results in unique behavior in aqueous environments. {'Figure_7_3_trygly Figure 7.3.trygly} depicts the structure of a  **triglyceride**. Because all three substituents on the glycerol backbone are long hydrocarbon chains, these compounds are nonpolar and not significantly attracted to polar water molecules—they are hydrophobic. Conversely,  **phospholipid**s such as the one shown in {'Figure_7_3_phospholip Figure 7.3.phospholip} have a negatively charged phosphate group. Because the phosphate is charged, it is capable of strong attraction to water molecules and thus is  **hydrophilic**, or “water loving.” The hydrophilic portion of the phospholipid is often referred to as a polar “head,” and the long hydrocarbon chains as nonpolar “tails.” A molecule presenting a hydrophobic portion and a hydrophilic moiety is said to be  **amphipathic**. Notice the “R” designation within the hydrophilic head depicted in {'Figure_7_3_phospholip Figure 7.3.phospholip}, indicating that a  **polar head group** can be more complex than a simple phosphate moiety. Glycolipids are examples in which carbohydrates are bonded to the lipids’ head groups.

The amphipathic nature of phospholipids enables them to form uniquely functional structures in aqueous environments. As mentioned, the polar heads of these molecules are strongly attracted to water molecules, and the nonpolar tails are not. Because of their considerable lengths, these tails are, in fact, strongly attracted to one another. As a result, energetically stable, large-scale assemblies of phospholipid molecules are formed in which the hydrophobic tails congregate within enclosed regions, shielded from contact with water by the polar heads ({'Figure_7_3_micelle Figure 7.3.micelle}). The simplest of these structures are  **micelle** **s**, spherical assemblies containing a hydrophobic interior of phospholipid tails and an outer surface of polar head groups. Larger and more complex structures are created from  **lipid-bilayer** sheets, or  **unit membranes**, which are large, two-dimensional assemblies of  **phospholipid**s congregated tail to tail. The cell membranes of nearly all organisms are made from lipid-bilayer sheets, as are the membranes of many intracellular components. These sheets may also form lipid-bilayer spheres that are the structural basis of  **vesicle**s and  **liposome**s, subcellular components that play a role in numerous physiological functions.


{image:'Figure_7_3_micelle}
        
