index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Lipids** are composed mainly of carbon and hydrogen, but they can also contain oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorous. They provide nutrients for organisms, store carbon and energy, play structural roles in membranes, and function as hormones, pharmaceuticals, fragrances, and pigments.
  * Fatty acids are long-chain hydrocarbons with a carboxylic acid functional group. Their relatively long nonpolar hydrocarbon chains make them  **hydrophobic**. Fatty acids with no double bonds are  **saturated**; those with double bonds are  **unsaturated**.
  * Fatty acids chemically bond to glycerol to form structurally essential lipids such as  **triglycerides** and  **phospholipids.** Triglycerides comprise three fatty acids bonded to glycerol, yielding a hydrophobic molecule. Phospholipids contain both hydrophobic hydrocarbon chains and polar head groups, making them  **amphipathic** and capable of forming uniquely functional large scale structures.
  * Biological membranes are large-scale structures based on phospholipid bilayers that provide hydrophilic exterior and interior surfaces suitable for aqueous environments, separated by an intervening hydrophobic layer. These bilayers are the structural basis for cell membranes in most organisms, as well as subcellular components such as vesicles.
  *  **Isoprenoids** are lipids derived from isoprene molecules that have many physiological roles and a variety of commercial applications.
  * A wax is a long-chain isoprenoid that is typically water resistant; an example of a wax-containing substance is sebum, produced by sebaceous glands in the skin.  **Steroids** are lipids with complex, ringed structures that function as structural components of cell membranes and as hormones.  **Sterols** are a subclass of steroids containing a hydroxyl group at a specific location on one of the molecule’s rings; one example is cholesterol.
  * Bacteria produce hopanoids, structurally similar to cholesterol, to strengthen bacterial membranes. Fungi and protozoa produce a strengthening agent called ergosterol.
