index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-12.3
name: FAQ 12.3
title: FAQ 12.3 - What Would Happen to Future Climate if We Stopped Emissions Today?

Stopping {Topics.*Emissions emissions} today is a scenario that is not plausible, but it is one of several idealized cases that provide insight into the response of the climate system and {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle}. As a result of the multiple time scales in the climate system, the relation between change in emissions and {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} is quite complex, with some changes still occurring long after emissions ceased. Models and process understanding show that as a result of the large ocean inertia and the long {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} of many greenhouse gases, primarily carbon dioxide, much of the warming would persist for centuries after {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} emissions have stopped.

When emitted in the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}, greenhouse gases get removed through chemical reactions with other reactive components or, in the case of carbon dioxide ({Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}), get exchanged with the ocean and the land. These processes characterize the lifetime of the gas in the atmosphere, defined as the time it takes for a concentration pulse to decrease by a factor of e (2.71). How long greenhouse gases and aerosols persist in the atmosphere varies over a wide range, from days to thousands of years. For example, aerosols have a lifetime of weeks, methane ({Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4}) of about 10 years, nitrous oxide ({Glossary.*Nitrous_oxide_N2O N2O}) of about 100 years and hexafluoroethane (C2F6) of about 10,000 years. CO2 is more complicated as it is removed from the atmosphere through multiple physical and biogeochemical processes in the ocean and the land; all operating at different time scales. For an emission pulse of about 1000 PgC, about half is removed within a few decades, but the remaining fraction stays in the atmosphere for much longer. About 15 to 40% of the CO2 pulse is still in the atmosphere after 1000 years.

As a result of the significant lifetimes of major {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} greenhouse gases, the increased atmospheric concentration due to past emissions will persist long after emissions are ceased. Concentration of greenhouse gases would not return immediately to their pre-industrial levels if emissions were halted. Methane concentration would return to values close to pre-industrial level in about 50 years, N2O concentrations would need several centuries, while CO2 would essentially never come back to its pre-industrial level on time scales relevant for our society. Changes in emissions of short-lived species like aerosols on the other hand would result in nearly instantaneous changes in their concentrations.

The climate system response to the greenhouse gases and aerosols forcing is characterized by an inertia, driven mainly by the ocean. The ocean has a very large capacity of absorbing heat and a slow mixing between the surface and the deep ocean. This means that it will take several centuries for the whole ocean to warm up and to reach equilibrium with the altered {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing}. The surface ocean (and hence the continents) will continue to warm until it reaches a {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} in equilibrium with this new radiative forcing. The {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} showed that if concentration of greenhouse gases were held constant at present day level, the Earth surface would still continue to warm by about 0.6°C over the 21st century relative to the year 2000. This is the climate commitment to current concentrations (or constant composition commitment), shown in grey in {FAQ_12_3 FAQ 12.3}, {'FAQ_12_3_Figure_1 Figure 1}. Constant emissions at current levels would further increase the atmospheric concentration and result in much more warming than observed so far ({FAQ_12_3 FAQ 12.3}, {'FAQ_12_3_Figure_1 Figure 1}, red lines).

{image:'FAQ_12_3_Figure_1}

Even if anthropogenic greenhouses gas emissions were halted now, the radiative forcing due to these longlived greenhouse gases concentrations would only slowly decrease in the future, at a rate determined by the lifetime of the gas (see above). Moreover, the climate response of the {Topics.*Climate_System Earth System} to that radiative forcing would be even slower. Global temperature would not respond quickly to the greenhouse gas concentration changes. Eliminating CO2 emissions only would lead to near constant temperature for many centuries. Eliminating short-lived negative forcings from sulphate aerosols at the same time (e.g., by air pollution reduction measures) would cause a temporary warming of a few tenths of a degree, as shown in blue in {FAQ_12_3 FAQ 12.3}, {'FAQ_12_3_Figure_1 Figure 1}. Setting all emissions to zero would therefore, after a short warming, lead to a near stabilization of the climate for multiple centuries. This is called the commitment from past emissions (or zero future emission commitment). The concentration of GHG would decrease and hence the radiative forcing as well, but the inertia of the climate system would delay the temperature response.

As a consequence of the large inertia in the climate and carbon cycle, the long-term global temperature is largely controlled by total CO2 emissions that have accumulated over time, irrespective of the time when they were emitted. Limiting global warming below a given level (e.g., 2°C above pre-industrial) therefore implies a given budget of CO2, that is, higher emissions earlier implies stronger reductions later. A higher climate target allows for a higher CO2 concentration peak, and hence larger cumulative CO2 emissions (e.g., permitting a delay in the necessary emission reduction).

Global temperature is a useful aggregate number to describe the magnitude of climate change, but not all changes will scale linearly global temperature. Changes in the {Glossary.*Water_cycle water cycle} for example also depend on the type of forcing (e.g., greenhouse gases, aerosols, {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change}), slower components of the Earth system such as {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} rise and {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} would take much longer to respond, and there may be critical thresholds or abrupt or irreversible changes in the climate system.
