index: hide
name: Acceleration - Introduction


{image:'Figure_2_4_0}
        

In everyday conversation, to accelerate means to speed up. The accelerator in a car can in fact cause it to speed up. The greater the  **acceleration**, the greater the change in velocity over a given time. The formal definition of acceleration is consistent with these notions, but more inclusive.

Because acceleration is velocity in m/s divided by time in s, the SI units for acceleration are <math xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><semantics><mrow><mrow><msup><mtext>m/s</mtext><mrow><mn>2</mn></mrow></msup></mrow><mrow/></mrow><annotation encoding="StarMath 5.0"> size 12&#123;&quot;m/s&quot; rSup &#123; size 8&#123;2&#125; &#125; &#125; &#123;&#125;</annotation></semantics></math>, meters per second squared or meters per second per second, which literally means by how many meters per second the velocity changes every second.

Recall that velocity is a vector—it has both magnitude and direction. This means that a change in velocity can be a change in magnitude (or speed), but it can also be a change in  *direction*. For example, if a car turns a corner at constant speed, it is accelerating because its direction is changing. The quicker you turn, the greater the acceleration. So there is an acceleration when velocity changes either in magnitude (an increase or decrease in speed) or in direction, or both.

Keep in mind that although acceleration is in the direction of the  *change* in velocity, it is not always in the direction of  *motion*. When an object slows down, its acceleration is opposite to the direction of its motion. This is known as  **deceleration**. 


{image:'Figure_2_4_a}
        
