index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.5.4
title: 12.4.5.4 - Runoff and Evaporation

In the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, 21st century model-{Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} {Glossary.*Runoff runoff} consistently showed decreases in southern Europe, the Middle East, and southwestern USA and increases in Southeast Asia, tropical East Africa and at high northern latitudes. The same general features appear in the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} for all four {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} shown in {'Figure_12_24 Figure 12.24}, with the areas of most robust change typically increasing with magnitude of {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} change. However, the robustness of runoff decreases in the southwestern USA is less in the CMIP5 models compared to the AR4. The large decreases in runoff in southern Europe and southern Africa are consistent with changes in the {Glossary.*Hadley_Circulation Hadley Circulation} and related precipitation decreases and warming-induced evapotranspiration increases. The high northern latitude runoff increases are likely under {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} and consistent with the projected precipitation increases ({'Figure_12_22 Figure 12.22}). The consistency of changes across different generations of models and different forcing {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}, together with the physical consistency of change indicates that decreases are also likely in runoff in southern Europe, the Middle East, and southern Africa in this scenario.

{image:'Figure_12_24}

A number of reports since the AR4 have updated findings from CMIP3 models and analyzed a large set of mechanisms affecting runoff. Several studies have focussed on the Colorado River basin in the United States ({cite.12.'Christensen_and_Lettenmaier_2007}; {cite.12.'McCabe_and_Wolock_2007}; {cite.12.'Barnett_and_Pierce_2008}; {cite.12.'Barnett_et_al_2008}) showing that runoff reductions that do happen under global warming occur through a combination of evapotranspiration increases and precipitation decreases, with the overall reduction in river flow exacerbated by human water demands on the basin’s supply.

A number of CMIP3 analyses have examined trends and seasonal shifts in runoff. For example, {cite.12.'Kienzle_et_al_2012 Kienzle et al. (2012)} studied climate change scenarios over the Cline River watershed in western Canada and projected (1) spring runoff and peak {Glossary.*Streamflow streamflow} up to 4 weeks earlier than in 1961–1990; (2) significantly higher streamflow between October and June; and (3) lower streamflow between July and September. For the Mediterranean basin, an ensemble of {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} models driven by several {Glossary.*Semi_empirical_model GCMs} using the A1B scenario have a robust decrease in runoff emerging only after 2050 (Sanchez-Gomez et al., 2009).

Annual mean surface evaporation in the models assessed in AR4 showed increases over most of the ocean and increases or decreases over land with largely the same pattern over land as increases and decreases in precipitation. Similar behaviour occurs in an ensemble of CMIP5 models ({'Figure_12_25 Figure 12.25}). Evaporation increases over most of the ocean and land, with prominent areas of decrease over land occurring in southern Africa and northwestern Africa along the Mediterranean. The areas of decrease correspond to areas with reduced precipitation. There is some uncertainty about storm-track changes over Europe (see Sections {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_3 12.4.3} and {Chapters.14.14_6.14_6_2 14.6.2}). However, the consistency of the decreases across different generations of models and different forcing scenarios along with the physical basis for the precipitation decrease indicates that these decreases in annual mean evaporation are likely under RCP8.5, but with medium confidence. Annual mean evaporation increases over land in the northern high latitudes are consistent with the increase in precipitation and the overall warming that would increase potential evaporation. For the northern high latitudes, the physical consistency and the similar behaviour across multiple generations and forcing scenarios indicates that annual mean evaporation increases there are likely, with high confidence.

{image:'Figure_12_25}

{Glossary.*Evapotranspiration Evapotranspiration} changes partly reflect changes in precipitation. However, some changes might come from altered biological processes. For example, increased atmospheric {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} promotes stomatal closure and reduced transpiration ({cite.12.'Betts_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Cruz_et_al_2010}) which can potentially yield increased runoff. There is potential for substantial {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} between vegetation changes and regional water cycles, though the impact of such feedback remains uncertain at this point due to limitations on modelling crop and other vegetation processes in GCMs (e.g., {cite.12.'Newlands_et_al_2012}) and {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in plant response, {Glossary.*Ecosystem ecosystem} shifts and land management changes.
