index: hide
name: Clostridium perfringens Gastroenteritis

#  *Clostridium perfringens* Gastroenteritis

 **Clostridium perfringens gastroenteritis** is a generally mild foodborne disease that is associated with undercooked meats and other foods.  *C. perfringens* is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, endospore-forming anaerobic bacterium that is tolerant of high and low temperatures. At high temperatures, the bacteria can form endospores that will germinate rapidly in foods or within the intestine. Food poisoning by type A strains is common. This strain always produces an  **enterotoxin**, sometimes also present in other strains, that causes the clinical symptoms of cramps and diarrhea. A more severe form of the illness, called  **pig-bel** or  **enteritis necroticans**, causes hemorrhaging, pain, vomiting, and bloating. Gangrene of the intestines may result. This form has a high mortality rate but is rare in the United States.

Diagnosis involves detecting the  *C. perfringens* toxin in stool samples using either molecular biology techniques (PCR detection of the toxin gene) or immunology techniques (ELISA). The bacteria itself may also be detected in foods or in fecal samples. Treatment includes rehydration therapy, electrolyte replacement, and intravenous fluids. Antibiotics are not recommended because they can damage the balance of the microbiota in the gut, and there are concerns about antibiotic resistance. The illness can be prevented through proper handling and cooking of foods, including prompt refrigeration at sufficiently low temperatures and cooking food to a sufficiently high temperature.
