index: hide
name: E. coli Infections

#  *E. coli* Infections

The gram-negative rod  **Escherichia coli** is a common member of the normal microbiota of the colon. Although the vast majority of  *E. coli* strains are helpful commensal bacteria, some can be pathogenic and may cause dangerous diarrheal disease. The pathogenic strains have additional virulence factors such as type 1  **fimbriae** that promote colonization of the colon or may produce toxins (see <link:>). These virulence factors are acquired through  **horizontal gene transfer**.

Extraintestinal disease can result if the bacteria spread from the gastrointestinal tract. Although these bacteria can be spread from person to person, they are often acquired through contaminated food or water. There are six recognized pathogenic groups of  *E. coli*, but we will focus here on the four that are most commonly transmitted through food and water.

 **Enterotoxigenic E. coli (ETEC)**, also known as  **traveler’s diarrhea**, causes diarrheal illness and is common in less developed countries. In Mexico, ETEC infection is called Montezuma’s Revenge. Following ingestion of contaminated food or water, infected individuals develop a watery diarrhea, abdominal cramps,  **malaise** (a feeling of being unwell), and a low fever. ETEC produces a heat-stable  **enterotoxin** similar to  **cholera toxin**, and  **adhesins** called  **colonization factors** that help the bacteria to attach to the intestinal wall. Some strains of ETEC also produce heat-labile toxins. The disease is usually relatively mild and self-limiting. Diagnosis involves culturing and PCR. If needed, antibiotic treatment with  **fluoroquinolones**,  **doxycycline**,  **rifaximin**, and  **trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole** ( **TMP/SMZ**) may shorten infection duration. However, antibiotic resistance is a problem.

 **Enteroinvasive E. coli (EIEC)** is very similar to  **shigellosis**, including its pathogenesis of intracellular invasion into intestinal epithelial tissue. This bacterium carries a large plasmid that is involved in epithelial cell penetration. The illness is usually self-limiting, with symptoms including watery diarrhea, chills, cramps, malaise, fever, and dysentery. Culturing and PCR testing can be used for diagnosis. Antibiotic treatment is not recommended, so supportive therapy is used if needed.

 **Enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC)** can cause a potentially fatal diarrhea, especially in infants and those in less developed countries. Fever, vomiting, and diarrhea can lead to severe dehydration. These  *E. coli* inject a protein (Tir) that attaches to the surface of the intestinal epithelial cells and triggers rearrangement of host cell actin from  **microvilli** to pedestals. Tir also happens to be the receptor for  **Intimin**, a surface protein produced by EPEC, thereby allowing  *E. coli* to “sit” on the pedestal. The genes necessary for this pedestal formation are encoded on the locus for  **enterocyte effacement** (LEE)  **pathogenicity island**. As with ETEC, diagnosis involves culturing and PCR. Treatment is similar to that for ETEC.

The most dangerous strains are  **enterohemorrhagic E. coli (EHEC)**, which are the strains capable of causing epidemics. In particular, the strain  **O157:H7** has been responsible for several recent outbreaks. Recall that the O and H refer to surface antigens that contribute to pathogenicity and trigger a host immune response (“O” refers to the O-side chain of the  **lipopolysaccharide** and the “H” refers to the  **flagella**). Similar to EPEC, EHEC also forms pedestals. EHEC also produces a Shiga-like toxin. Because the genome of this bacterium has been sequenced, it is known that the  **Shiga toxin** genes were most likely acquired through transduction (horizontal gene transfer). The Shiga toxin genes originated from  **Shigella** *dysenteriae*. Prophage from a bacteriophage that previously infected  *Shigella* integrated into the chromosome of  *E. coli*. The Shiga-like toxin is often called verotoxin.

EHEC can cause disease ranging from relatively mild to life-threatening. Symptoms include bloody diarrhea with severe cramping, but no fever. Although it is often self-limiting, it can lead to hemorrhagic colitis and profuse bleeding. One possible complication is HUS. Diagnosis involves culture, often using MacConkey with sorbitol agar to differentiate between  *E. coli* O157:H7, which does not ferment sorbitol, and other less virulent strains of  *E. coli* that can ferment sorbitol.

Serological typing or PCR testing also can be used, as well as genetic testing for Shiga toxin. To distinguish EPEC from EHEC, because they both form pedestals on intestinal epithelial cells, it is necessary to test for genes encoding for both the Shiga-like toxin and for the LEE. Both EPEC and EHEC have LEE, but EPEC lacks the gene for Shiga toxin. Antibiotic therapy is not recommended and may worsen HUS because of the toxins released when the bacteria are killed, so supportive therapies must be used.  summarizes the characteristics of the four most common pathogenic groups.


****

| Group | Virulence Factors and Genes | Signs and Symptoms | Diagnostic Tests | Treatment |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Enterotoxigenic  *E. coli* (ETEC) | Heat stable enterotoxin similar to cholera toxin | Relatively mild, watery diarrhea | Culturing, PCR | Self-limiting; if needed, fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, rifaximin, TMP/SMZ; antibiotic resistance is a problem |
| Enteroinvasive  *E. coli* (EIEC) |  *Inv* (invasive plasmid) genes | Relatively mild, watery diarrhea; dysentery or inflammatory colitis may occur | Culturing, PCR; testing for  *inv* gene; additional assays to distinguish from  *Shigella* | Supportive therapy only; antibiotics not recommended |
| Enteropathogenic  *E. coli* (EPEC) | Locus of enterocyte effacement (LEE) pathogenicity island | Severe fever, vomiting, nonbloody diarrhea, dehydration; potentially fatal | Culturing, PCR; detection of LEE lacking Shiga-like toxin genes | Self-limiting; if needed, fluoroquinolones, doxycycline, rifaximin (TMP/SMZ); antibiotic resistance is a problem |
| Enterohemorrhagic  *E. coli* (EHEC) | Verotoxin | May be mild or very severe; bloody diarrhea; may result in HUS | Culturing; plate on MacConkey agar with sorbitol agar as it does not ferment sorbitol; PCR detection of LEE containing Shiga-like toxin genes | Antibiotics are not recommended due to the risk of HUS |
    
