index: hide
name: Cholera and Other Vibrios

The gastrointestinal disease  **cholera** is a serious infection often associated with poor sanitation, especially following natural disasters, because it is spread through contaminated water and food that has not been heated to temperatures high enough to kill the bacteria. It is caused by  **Vibrio cholerae** serotype O1, a gram-negative, flagellated bacterium in the shape of a curved rod (vibrio). According to the CDC, cholera causes an estimated 3 to 5 million cases and 100,000 deaths each year.

Because  *V. cholerae* is killed by stomach acid, relatively large doses are needed for a few microbial cells to survive to reach the intestines and cause infection. The motile cells travel through the mucous layer of the intestines, where they attach to epithelial cells and release  **cholera enterotoxin**. The toxin is an A-B toxin with activity through adenylate cyclase (see <link:>). Within the intestinal cell, cyclic AMP (cAMP) levels increase, which activates a chloride channel and results in the release of ions into the intestinal lumen. This increase in osmotic pressure in the lumen leads to water also entering the lumen. As the water and electrolytes leave the body, it causes rapid dehydration and electrolyte imbalance. Diarrhea is so profuse that it is often called “rice water stool,” and patients are placed on cots with a hole in them to monitor the fluid loss ({'Figure_24_3_VibrioChol Figure 24.3.VibrioChol}).

Cholera is diagnosed by taking a stool sample and culturing for  *Vibrio*. The bacteria are oxidase positive and show non-lactose fermentation on MacConkey agar. Gram-negative lactose fermenters will produce red colonies while non-fermenters will produce white/colorless colonies. Gram-positive bacteria will not grow on MacConkey. Lactose fermentation is commonly used for pathogen identification because the normal microbiota generally ferments lactose while pathogens do not.  *V. cholerae* may also be cultured on thiosulfate citrate bile salts sucrose (TCBS) agar, a selective and differential media for  *Vibrio* spp., which produce a distinct yellow colony.

Cholera may be self-limiting and treatment involves rehydration and electrolyte replenishment. Although antibiotics are not typically needed, they can be used for severe or disseminated disease. Tetracyclines are recommended, but  **doxycycline**,  **erythromycin**,  **orfloxacin**,  **ciprofloxacin**, and  **TMP/SMZ** may be used. Recent evidence suggests that  **azithromycin** is also a good first-line antibiotic. Good sanitation—including appropriate sewage treatment, clean supplies for cooking, and purified drinking water—is important to prevent infection ({'Figure_24_3_VibrioChol Figure 24.3.VibrioChol})


{image:'Figure_24_3_VibrioChol}
        

 *V. cholera* is not the only  **Vibrio** species that can cause disease.  *V. parahemolyticus* is associated with consumption of contaminated seafood and causes gastrointestinal illness with signs and symptoms such as watery diarrhea, nausea, fever, chills, and abdominal cramps. The bacteria produce a heat-stable  **hemolysin**, leading to dysentery and possible disseminated disease. It also sometimes causes wound infections.  *V. parahemolyticus* is diagnosed using cultures from blood, stool, or a wound. As with  *V. cholera*, selective medium (especially TCBS agar) works well. Tetracycline and  **ciprofloxacin** can be used to treat severe cases, but antibiotics generally are not needed.

 *Vibrio vulnificus* is found in warm seawater and, unlike  *V. cholerae*, is not associated with poor sanitary conditions. The bacteria can be found in raw seafood, and ingestion causes gastrointestinal illness. It can also be acquired by individuals with open skin wounds who are exposed to water with high concentrations of the pathogen. In some cases, the infection spreads to the bloodstream and causes septicemia. Skin infection can lead to edema, ecchymosis (discoloration of skin due to bleeding), and abscesses. Patients with underlying disease have a high fatality rate of about 50%. It is of particular concern for individuals with chronic liver disease or who are otherwise immunodeficient because a healthy immune system can often prevent infection from developing.  *V. vulnificus* is diagnosed by culturing for the pathogen from stool samples, blood samples, or skin abscesses. Adult patients are treated with  **doxycycline** combined with a third generation  **cephalosporin** or with  **fluoroquinolones**, and children are treated with  **TMP/SMZ**.

Two other vibrios,  **Aeromonas hydrophila** and  **Plesiomonas shigelloides**, are also associated with marine environments and raw seafood; they can also cause gastroenteritis. Like  *V. vulnificus*,  *A. hydrophila* is more often associated with infections in wounds, generally those acquired in water. In some cases, it can also cause septicemia. Other species of  *Aeromonas* can cause illness.  *P. shigelloides* is sometimes associated with more serious systemic infections if ingested in contaminated food or water. Culture can be used to diagnose  *A. hydrophila* and  *P. shigelloides* infections, for which antibiotic therapy is generally not needed. When necessary,  **tetracycline** and  **ciprofloxacin**, among other antibiotics, may be used for treatment of  *A. hydrophila*, and  **fluoroquinolones** and  **trimethoprim** are the effective treatments for  *P. shigelloides*.
