index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3
title: 8.3 - Present-Day Anthropogenic Radiative Forcing

Human activity has caused a variety of changes in different forcing agents in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} or land surface. A large number of {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} have had a substantial increase over the Industrial Era and some of these gases are entirely of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} origin. Atmospheric aerosols have diverse and complex influences on the climate. Human activity has modified the land cover and changed the surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo}. Some of the gases and aerosols are directly emitted to the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} whereas others are secondary products from chemical reactions of emitted species. The lifetimes of these different forcing agents vary substantially. This section discusses all known {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} agents of non-negligible importance and their quantification in terms of RF or {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF} based on changes in abundance over the 1750–2011 period.

In this section we determine the RFs for {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHGs} and heterogeneously distributed species in fundamentally different ways. As described in {Box_8_2 Box 8.2}, the concentrations of WMGHGs can be determined from observations at a few surface sites. For the pre-industrial concentrations these are typically from trapped air in polar ice or firn (see {Chapters.2.2_2.2_2_1 Section 2.2.1}). Thus the RFs from WMGHGs are determined entirely from observations ({Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_2 Section 8.3.2}). In contrast, we do not have sufficient pre-industrial or present-day observations of heterogeneously distributed forcing agents (e.g., {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} and aerosols) to be able to characterize their RF; therefore we instead have to rely on chemistry–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} (Sections {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_3 8.3.3} and {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4 8.3.4}).
