index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.2.3
title: 9.2.3 - The Model Evaluation Approach Used in this Chapter and Its Limitations

This chapter applies a variety of evaluation techniques ranging from visual comparison of observations and the multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} and its mean, to application of quantitative performance metrics (see {Chapters.9.9_2.9_2_2 Section 9.2.2}). No individual evaluation technique or performance measure is considered superior; rather, it is the combined use of many techniques and measures that provides a comprehensive overview of model performance.

Although crucial, the evaluation of {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} based on {Topics.*Past_Climate past climate} observations has some important limitations. By necessity, it is limited to those variables and phenomena for which observations exist. {'Table_9_3 Table 9.3} provides an overview of the observations used in this chapter. In many cases, the lack or insufficient quality of long-term observations, be it a specific variable, an important processes, or a particular {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} (e.g., polar areas, the upper {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere}/lower {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} (UTLS), and the deep ocean), remains an impediment. In addition, owing to observational {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} and the presence of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability}, the observational record against which models are assessed is ‘imperfect’. These limitations can be reduced, but not entirely eliminated, through the use of multiple independent observations of the same variable as well as the use of model ensembles.

{table:'Table_9_3}

The approach to model evaluation taken in the chapter reflects the need for climate models to represent the observed behaviour of past climate as a necessary condition to be considered a viable tool for future {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}. This does not, however, provide an answer to the much more difficult question of determining how well a model must agree with observations before projections made with it can be deemed reliable. Since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, there are a few examples of emergent constraints where observations are used to constrain multi-model ensemble projections. These examples, which are discussed further in {Chapters.9.9_8.9_8_3 Section 9.8.3}, remain part of an area of active and as yet inconclusive research.
