index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.2.6
title: 4.2.2.6 - Timing of Sea Ice Advance, Retreat and Ice Season Duration; Length of Melt Season

Importantly from both physical and biological perspectives, strong regional changes have occurred in the seasonality of {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} in both polar regions ({cite.4.'Massom_and_Stammerjohn_2010}; {cite.4.'Stammerjohn_et_al_2012}). However, there are distinct regional differences in when seasonally the change is strongest ({cite.4.'Stammerjohn_et_al_2012}).

Seasonality collectively describes the annual time of sea ice advance and retreat, and its duration (the time between day of advance and retreat). Daily satellite ice-concentration records (1979–2012) are used to determine the day to which sea ice advanced, and the day from which it retreated, for each satellite pixel location. Maps of the timing of sea ice advance, retreat and duration are derived from these data (see {cite.4.'Parkinson_2002 Parkinson (2002)} and {cite.4.'Stammerjohn_et_al_2008 Stammerjohn et al. (2008)} for detailed methods).

Most regions in the Arctic show trends towards shorter ice season duration. One of the most rapidly changing areas (showing greater than 2 days yr–1 change) extends from the East Siberian Sea to the western Beaufort Sea. Here, between 1979 and 2011, sea ice advance occurred 41 ± 6 days later (or 1.3 ± 0.2 days yr–1), sea ice retreat 49 ± 7 days earlier (–1.5 ± 0.2 days yr–1), and duration became 90 ± 16 days shorter (–2.8 ± 0.5 days yr–1) ({cite.4.'Stammerjohn_et_al_2012}). This 3-month lengthening of the summer ice-free season places Arctic summer sea ice extent loss into a seasonal perspective and underscores impacts to the marine {Glossary.*Ecosystem ecosystem} (e.g., {cite.4.'Grebmeier_et_al_2010}).

The timing of surface melt onset in spring, and freeze-up in autumn, can be derived from satellite microwave data as the emissivity of the surface changes significantly with snow melt ({cite.4.'Smith_1998}; {cite.4.'Drobot_and_Anderson_2001}; {cite.4.'Belchansky_et_al_2004}). The amount of solar energy absorbed by the ice cover increases with the length of the melt season. Longer melt seasons with lower {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} surfaces (wet snow, melt ponds and open water) increase absorption of incoming {Glossary.*Shortwave_radiation shortwave radiation} and ice melt ({cite.4.'Perovich_et_al_2007}). {cite.4.'Hudson_2011 Hudson (2011)} estimates that the observed reduction in Arctic sea ice has contributed approximately 0.1 W m–2 of additional global {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing}, and that an ice-free summer Arctic Ocean will result in a forcing of about 0.3 W m–2. The satellite record ({cite.4.'Markus_et_al_2009}) shows a {Glossary.*Trend trend} toward earlier melt and later freeze-up nearly everywhere in the Arctic ({'Figure_4_6 Figure 4.6}e). Over the last 34 years, the mean melt season over the Arctic ice cover has increased at a rate of 5.7 ± 0.9 days per decade. The largest and most significant trends (at the 99% level) of more than 10 days per decade are seen in the coastal margins and peripheral seas: Hudson Bay, the East Greenland Sea, the Laptev/East Siberian seas, and the Chukchi/ Beaufort seas.
