index: hide
name: Cryptococcosis

#  *Cryptococcosis*

Infection by the encapsulated yeast  **Cryptococcus neoformans** causes  **cryptococcosis**. This fungus is ubiquitous in the soil and can be isolated from bird feces. Immunocompromised people are infected by inhaling basidiospores found in aerosols. The thick polysaccharide capsule surrounding these microbes enables them to avoid clearance by the alveolar macrophage. Initial symptoms of infection include fever, fatigue, and a dry cough. In immunocompromised patients, pulmonary infections often disseminate to the brain. The resulting  **meningitis** produces headaches, sensitivity to light, and confusion. Left untreated, such infections are often fatal.

 *Cryptococcus* infections are often diagnosed based on microscopic examination of lung tissues or cerebrospinal fluids. India ink preparations ({'Figure_22_4_Crypto Figure 22.4.Crypto}) can be used to visualize the extensive capsules that surround the yeast cells. Serological tests are also available to confirm the diagnosis. Amphotericin B, in combination with  **flucytosine**, is typically used for the initial treatment of pulmonary infections. Amphotericin B is a broad-spectrum antifungal drug that targets fungal cell membranes. It can also adversely impact host cells and produce side effects. For this reason, clinicians must carefully balance the risks and benefits of treatments in these patients. Because it is difficult to eradicate cryptococcal infections, patients usually need to take  **fluconazole** for up to 6 months after treatment with  **amphotericin B** and flucytosine to clear the fungus. Cryptococcal infections are more common in immunocompromised people, such as those with AIDS. These patients typically require life-long suppressive therapy to control this fungal infection.


{image:'Figure_22_4_Crypto}
        
