index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Fungal pathogens rarely cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals, but inhalation of fungal spores can cause severe pneumonia and systemic infections in immunocompromised patients.
  * Antifungal drugs like amphotericin B can control most fungal respiratory infections.
  *  **Histoplasmosis** is caused by a mold that grows in soil rich in bird or bat droppings. Few exposed individuals become sick, but vulnerable individuals are susceptible. The yeast-like infectious cells grow inside phagocytes.
  *  **Coccidioidomycosis** is also acquired from soil and, in some individuals, will cause lesions on the face. Extreme cases may infect other organs, causing death.
  *  **Blastomycosis**, a rare disease caused by a soil fungus, typically produces a mild lung infection but can become disseminated in the immunocompromised. Systemic cases are fatal if untreated.
  *  **Mucormycosis** is a rare disease, caused by fungi of the order Mucorales. It primarily affects immunocompromised people. Infection involves growth of the hyphae into infected tissues and can lead to death in some cases.
  *  **Aspergillosis**, caused by the common soil fungus  *Aspergillus*, infects immunocompromised people. Hyphal balls may impede lung function and hyphal growth into tissues can cause damage. Disseminated forms can lead to death.
  *  **Pneumocystis pneumonia** is caused by the fungus  *P. jirovecii*. The disease is found in patients with AIDS and other immunocompromised individuals. Sulfa drug treatments have side effects, but untreated cases may be fatal.
  *  **Cryptococcosis** is caused by  *Cryptococcus neoformans*. Lung infections may move to the brain, causing meningitis, which can be fatal.
