index: hide
name: Coccidioidomycosis

Infection by the dimorphic fungus  **Coccidioides immitis** causes  **coccidioidomycosis**. Because the microbe is endemic to the San Joaquin Valley of California, the disease is sometimes referred to as Valley fever. A related species that causes similar infections is found in semi-arid and arid regions of the southwestern United States, Mexico, and Central and South America.

Like histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis is acquired by inhaling fungal spores—in this case, arthrospores formed by hyphal fragmentation. Once in the body, the fungus differentiates into spherules that are filled with endospores. Most  *C. immitis* infections are asymptomatic and self-limiting. However, the infection can be very serious for immunocompromised patients. The endospores may be transported in the blood, disseminating the infection and leading to the formation of  **granulomatous lesions** on the face and nose ({'Figure_22_4_Coccidioid Figure 22.4.Coccidioid}). In severe cases, other major organs can become infected, leading to serious complications such as fatal  **meningitis**.

Coccidioidomycosis can be diagnosed by culturing clinical samples.  *C. immitis* readily grows on laboratory fungal media, such as  **Sabouraud's dextrose agar**, at 35 °C (95 °F). Culturing the fungus, however, is rather dangerous.  *C. immitis* is one of the most infectious fungal pathogens known and is capable of causing laboratory-acquired infections. Indeed, until 2012, this organism was considered a “select agent” of bioterrorism and classified as a  **BSL-3 microbe**. Serological tests for antibody production are more often used for diagnosis. Although mild cases generally do not require intervention, disseminated infections can be treated with intravenous antifungal drugs like  **amphotericin B**.


{image:'Figure_22_4_Coccidioid}
        
