index: hide
name: External Fertilization

External fertilization usually occurs in aquatic environments where both eggs and sperm are released into the water. After the sperm reaches the egg, fertilization takes place. Most external fertilization happens during the process of spawning where one or several females release their eggs and the male(s) release sperm in the same area, at the same time. The spawning may be triggered by environmental signals, such as water temperature or the length of daylight. Nearly all fish spawn, as do crustaceans (such as crabs and shrimp), mollusks (such as oysters), squid, and echinoderms (such as sea urchins and sea cucumbers). Revise to "Frogs, corals, squid, and octopuses also spawn ({'Figure_18_1_5 Figure 18.1.5}).


{image:'Figure_18_1_5}
        

## Internal Fertilization

Internal fertilization occurs most often in terrestrial animals, although some aquatic animals also use this method. Internal fertilization may occur by the male directly depositing sperm in the female during mating. It may also occur by the male depositing sperm in the environment, usually in a protective structure, which a female picks up to deposit the sperm in her reproductive tract. There are three ways that offspring are produced following internal fertilization. In  **oviparity**, fertilized eggs are laid outside the female’s body and develop there, receiving nourishment from the yolk that is a part of the egg ({'Figure_18_1_6 Figure 18.1.6} **a**). This occurs in some bony fish, some reptiles, a few cartilaginous fish, some amphibians, a few mammals, and all birds. Most non-avian reptiles and insects produce leathery eggs, while birds and some turtles produce eggs with high concentrations of calcium carbonate in the shell, making them hard. Chicken eggs are an example of a hard shell. The eggs of the egg-laying mammals such as the platypus and echidna are leathery.

In  **ovoviparity**, fertilized eggs are retained in the female, and the embryo obtains its nourishment from the egg’s yolk. The eggs are retained in the female’s body until they hatch inside of her, or she lays the eggs right before they hatch. This process helps protect the eggs until hatching. This occurs in some bony fish (like the platyfish  *Xiphophorus maculatus,*{'Figure_18_1_6 Figure 18.1.6} **b**), some sharks, lizards, some snakes (garter snake  *Thamnophis sirtalis*), some vipers, and some invertebrate animals (Madagascar hissing cockroach  *Gromphadorhina portentosa*).

In  **viviparity** the young are born alive. They obtain their nourishment from the female and are born in varying states of maturity. This occurs in most mammals ({'Figure_18_1_6 Figure 18.1.6} **c**), some cartilaginous fish, and a few reptiles.


{image:'Figure_18_1_6}
        
