index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.5.4.3
title: 12.5.4.3 - Conclusions and Limitations

One difficulty with the concepts of climate stabilization and targets is that stabilization of global temperature does not imply stabilization for all aspects of the climate system. For example, some models show significant hysteresis behaviour in the global {Glossary.*Water_cycle water cycle}, because global precipitation depends on both atmospheric {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} and temperature ({cite.12.'Wu_et_al_2010}). Processes related to vegetation changes ({cite.12.'Jones_et_al_2009}) or changes in the ice sheets ({cite.12.'Charbit_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Ridley_et_al_2010}) as well as {Glossary.*Ocean_acidification ocean acidification}, deep ocean warming and associated {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} rise ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2005b}; {cite.12.'Wigley_2005}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2013}) (see {'Figure_12_44 Figure 12.44}d), and potential feedbacks linking, for example, ocean and the ice sheets ({cite.12.'Gillett_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Goelzer_et_al_2011}), have their own intrinsic long time scales. Those will result in significant changes hundreds to thousands of years after global temperature is stabilized. {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion Thermal expansion}, in contrast to global mean temperature, also depends on the evolution of {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} ({cite.12.'Stouffer_and_Manabe_1999}; {cite.12.'Bouttes_et_al_2013}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2013}).

The simplicity of the concept of a cumulative carbon emission budget makes it attractive for policy ({cite.12.'WBGU_2009}). The principal driver of long term warming is the total cumulative emission of CO2 over time. To limit warming caused by CO2 {Topics.*Emissions emissions} to a given temperature target, cumulative CO2 emissions from all {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} sources therefore need to be limited to a certain budget. Higher emissions in earlier decades simply imply lower emissions by the same amount later on. This is illustrated in the {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} scenario in {'Figure_12_46 Figure 12.46}a/b. Two idealized emission pathways with initially higher emissions (even sustained at high level for a decade in one case) eventually lead to the same warming if emissions are then reduced much more rapidly. Even a stepwise emission pathway with levels constant at 2010 and zero near mid-century would eventually lead to a similar warming as they all have identical cumulative emissions.

{image:'Figure_12_46}

However, several aspects related to the concept of a cumulative carbon emission budget should be kept in mind. The ratio of global temperature and cumulative carbon is only approximately constant. It is the result of an interplay of several compensating {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} and climate {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} processes operating on different time scales (a cancellation of variations in the increase in RF per ppm of CO2, the ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} efficiency and the {Glossary.*Airborne_fraction airborne fraction}) ({cite.12.'Gregory_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Matthews_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Solomon_et_al_2009}). It depends on the modelled {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} and carbon cycle feedbacks. Thus, the allowed emissions for a given temperature target are uncertain (see {'Figure_12_45 Figure 12.45}) ({cite.12.'Matthews_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Knutti_and_Plattner_2012}). Nevertheless, the relationship is nearly linear in all models. Most models do not consider the possibility that long term feedbacks ({cite.12.'Hansen_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Knutti_and_Hegerl_2008}) may be different (see {Chapters.12.12_5.12_5_3 Section 12.5.3}). Despite the fact that stabilization refers to equilibrium, the results assessed here are primarily relevant for the next few centuries and may differ for millennial scales. Notably, many of these limitations apply similarly to other policy targets, for example, stabilizing the atmospheric CO2 concentration.

Non-CO2 forcing constituents are important, which requires either assumptions on how CO2 emission reductions are linked to changes in other {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} ({cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2006}; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'McCollum_et_al_2013}), or separate emission budgets and climate modelling for short-lived and long-lived gases. So far, many studies ignored non-CO2 forcings altogether. Those that consider them find significant effects, in particular warming of several tenths of a degree for abrupt reductions in emissions of short-lived species, like aerosols ({cite.12.'Brasseur_and_Roeckner_2005}; {cite.12.'Hare_and_Meinshausen_2006}; {cite.12.'Zickfeld_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Armour_and_Roe_2011}; {cite.12.'Tanaka_and_Raddatz_2011}) (see also {FAQ_12_3 FAQ 12.3}). Other studies, which model reductions that explicitly target warming from short-lived non-CO2 species only, find important short-term cooling benefits shortly after the reduction of these species ({cite.12.'Shindell_et_al_2012}), but do not extend beyond 2030.

The concept of cumulative carbon also implies that higher initial emissions can be compensated by a faster decline in emissions later or by negative emissions. However, in the real world short-term and longterm goals are not independent and {Glossary.*Mitigation mitigation} rates are limited by economic constraints and existing infrastructure ({cite.12.'Rive_et_al_2007}; {cite.12.'Mignone_et_al_2008}; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Davis_et_al_2010}; {cite.12.'Friedlingstein_et_al_2011}; {cite.12.'Rogelj_et_al_2013}). An analysis of 193 published emission pathways with an {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} model ({cite.12.'UNEP_2010}; {cite.12.'Rogelj_et_al_2011}) is shown in {'Figure_12_46 Figure 12.46}c, d. Those emission pathways that likely limit warming below 2°C (above pre-industrial) by 2100 show emissions of about 31 to 46 Pg(CO2-eq) yr–1 and 17 to 23 Pg(CO2-eq) yr–1 by 2020 and 2050, respectively. Median 2010 emissions of all models are 48 Pg(CO2-eq) yr–1. Note that, as opposed to {'Figure_12_46 Figure 12.46}a, b, many {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} still have positive emissions in 2100. As these will not be zero immediately after 2100, they imply that the warming may exceed the target after 2100.

The aspects discussed above do not limit the robustness of the overall scientific assessment, but highlight factors that need to be considered when determining cumulative CO2 emissions consistent with a given temperature target. In conclusion, taking into account the available information from {Topics.*Evidence_of_Change multiple lines of evidence} (observations, models and process understanding), the near linear relationship between cumulative CO2 emissions and peak global mean temperature is well established in the literature and robust for cumulative total CO2 emissions up to about 2000 PgC. It is consistent with the relationship inferred from past cumulative CO2 emissions and observed warming, is supported by process understanding of the carbon cycle and global energy balance, and emerges as a robust result from the entire hierarchy of models.

Using a best estimate for the {Glossary.*Transient_climate_response_to_cumulative_CO2_emissions TCRE} would provide a most likely value for the cumulative CO2 emissions compatible with stabilization at a given temperature. However, such a budget would imply about 50% probability for staying below the temperature target. Higher probabilities for staying below a temperature or concentration target require significantly lower budgets ({cite.12.'Knutti_et_al_2005}; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009}; {cite.12.'Rogelj_et_al_2012}). Based on the assessment of TCRE (assuming a normal distribution with a ±1 standard deviation range of 0.82.5°C per 1000 PgC), limiting the warming caused by anthropogenic CO2 emissions alone (i.e., ignoring other radiative forcings) to less than 2°C since the period 1861–1880 with a probability of >33%, >50% and >66%, total CO2 emissions from all anthropogenic sources would need to be below a cumulative budget of about 1570 PgC, 1210 PgC and 1000 PgC since 1870, respectively. An amount of 515 [445 to 585] PgC was emitted between 1870 and 2011. Accounting for non-CO2 forcings contributing to peak warming, or requiring a higher {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} of temperatures remaining below 2°C, both imply lower cumulative CO2 emissions. A possible release of {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} from {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost} or methane hydrates, not accounted for in current models, would also further reduce the anthropogenic CO2 emissions compatible with a given temperature target. When accounting for the non-CO2 forcings as in the RCP scenarios, compatible carbon emissions since 1870 are reduced to about 900 PgC, 820 PgC and 790 PgC to limit warming to less than 2°C since the period 1861–1880 with a probability of >33%, >50%, and >66%, respectively. These estimates were derived by computing the fraction of CMIP5 {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} and {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs} that stay below 2°C for given cumulative emissions following {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}, as shown in TFE.8 Figure 1c. The non-CO2 forcing in RCP8.5 is higher than in RCP2.6. Because all likelihood statements in calibrated IPCC language are open intervals, the provided estimates are thus both conservative and consistent choices valid for non-CO2 forcings across all RCP scenarios. There is no RCP scenario which limits warming to 2°C with probabilities of >33% or >50%, and which could be used to directly infer compatible cumulative emissions. For a probability of >66% RCP2.6 can be used as a comparison. Combining the average back-calculated fossil fuel carbon emissions for RCP2.6 between 2012 and 2100 (270 PgC) with the average historical estimate of 515 PgC gives a total of 785 PgC, i.e., 790 PgC when rounded to 10 PgC. As the 785 PgC estimate excludes an explicit assessment of future land-use change emissions, the 790 PgC value also remains a conservative estimate consistent with the overall likelihood assessment. The ranges of emissions for these three likelihoods based on the RCP scenarios are rather narrow, as they are based on a single scenario and on the limited sample of models available (TFE.8 Figure 1c). In contrast to TCRE they do not include observational constraints or account for sources of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} not sampled by the models. The concept of a fixed cumulative CO2 budget holds not just for 2°C, but for any temperature level explored with models so far (up to about 5°C; see {'Figure_12_44 Figures 12.44} to 12.46), with higher temperature levels implying larger budgets.
