index: hide
name: Streptococcal Infections

A common upper respiratory infection,  **streptococcal pharyngitis** ( **strep throat**) is caused by  **Streptococcus pyogenes**. This gram-positive bacterium appears as chains of cocci, as seen in {'Figure_22_2_Pyogenes Figure 22.2.Pyogenes}. Rebecca  **Lancefield** serologically classified streptococci in the 1930s using carbohydrate antigens from the bacterial cell walls.  *S. pyogenes* is the sole member of the Lancefield group A streptococci and is often referred to as GAS, or group A strep.


{image:'Figure_22_2_Pyogenes}
        

Similar to streptococcal infections of the skin, the mucosal membranes of the pharynx are damaged by the release of a variety of exoenzymes and exotoxins by this extracellular pathogen. Many strains of  *S. pyogenes* can degrade connective tissues by using  **hyaluronidase**,  **collagenase** and  **streptokinase**. Streptokinase activates plasmin, which leads to degradation of fibrin and, in turn, dissolution of blood clots, which assists in the spread of the pathogen. Released toxins include  **streptolysin**s that can destroy red and white blood cells. The classic signs of streptococcal pharyngitis are a fever higher than 38 °C (100.4 °F); intense pharyngeal pain; erythema associated with pharyngeal inflammation; and swollen, dark-red palatine tonsils, often dotted with patches of pus; and petechiae (microcapillary hemorrhages) on the soft or hard palate (roof of the mouth) ({'Figure_22_2_StrepThroa Figure 22.2.StrepThroa}). The submandibular lymph nodes beneath the angle of the jaw are also often swollen during strep throat.

Some strains of  **group A streptococci** produce  **erythrogenic toxin**. This exotoxin is encoded by a temperate bacteriophage (bacterial virus) and is an example of  **phage conversion** (see <link:>). The toxin attacks the plasma membranes of capillary endothelial cells and leads to  **scarlet fever** (or scarlatina), a disseminated fine red rash on the skin, and  **strawberry tongue**, a red rash on the tongue ({'Figure_22_2_StrepThroa Figure 22.2.StrepThroa}). Severe cases may even lead to  **streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS)**, which results from massive superantigen production that leads to septic shock and death.

 *S. pyogenes* can be easily spread by direct contact or droplet transmission through coughing and sneezing. The disease can be diagnosed quickly using a rapid enzyme immunoassay for the group A antigen. However, due to a significant rate of false-negative results (up to 30%), culture identification is still the gold standard to confirm pharyngitis due to  *S. pyogenes*.  *S. pyogenes* can be identified as a catalase-negative, beta hemolytic bacterium that is susceptible to 0.04 units of bacitracin. Antibiotic resistance is limited for this bacterium, so most β-lactams remain effective; oral amoxicillin and intramuscular penicillin G are those most commonly prescribed.


{image:'Figure_22_2_StrepThroa}
        

## Sequelae of  *S. pyogenes* Infections

One reason strep throat infections are aggressively treated with antibiotics is because they can lead to serious  **sequelae**, later clinical consequences of a primary infection. It is estimated that 1%–3% of untreated  *S. pyogenes* infections can be followed by nonsuppurative (without the production of pus) sequelae that develop 1–3 weeks after the acute infection has resolved. Two such sequelae are  **acute rheumatic fever** and  **acute glomerulonephritis**.

Acute rheumatic fever can follow pharyngitis caused by specific rheumatogenic strains of  *S. pyogenes* (strains 1, 3, 5, 6, and 18). Although the exact mechanism responsible for this sequela remains unclear, molecular mimicry between the M protein of rheumatogenic strains of  *S. pyogenes* and heart tissue is thought to initiate the autoimmune attack. The most serious and lethal clinical manifestation of rheumatic fever is damage to and inflammation of the heart ( **carditis**). Acute glomerulonephritis also results from an immune response to streptococcal antigens following pharyngitis and cutaneous infections. Acute glomerulonephritis develops within 6–10 days after pharyngitis, but can take up to 21 days after a cutaneous infection. Similar to acute rheumatic fever, there are strong associations between specific nephritogenic strains of  *S. pyogenes* and acute glomerulonephritis, and evidence suggests a role for antigen mimicry and autoimmunity. However, the primary mechanism of acute glomerulonephritis appears to be the formation of immune complexes between  *S. pyogenes* antigens and antibodies, and their deposition between endothelial cells of the glomeruli of kidney. Inflammatory response against the immune complexes leads to damage and inflammation of the glomeruli (glomerulonephritis).
