index: hide
name: Bacterial Pneumonia

Pneumonia is a general term for infections of the lungs that lead to inflammation and accumulation of fluids and white blood cells in the alveoli. Pneumonia can be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other organisms, although the vast majority of pneumonias are bacterial in origin. Bacterial pneumonia is a prevalent, potentially serious infection; it caused more 50,000 deaths in the United States in 2014. As the alveoli fill with fluids and white blood cells (consolidation), air exchange becomes impaired and patients experience respiratory distress ({'Figure_22_2_Pneumonia Figure 22.2.Pneumonia}). In addition, pneumonia can lead to  **pleurisy**, an infection of the pleural membrane surrounding the lungs, which can make breathing very painful. Although many different bacteria can cause pneumonia under the right circumstances, three bacterial species cause most clinical cases:  **Streptococcus pneumoniae**,  **H. influenzae**, and  **Mycoplasma pneumoniae**. In addition to these, we will also examine some of the less common causes of pneumonia.


{image:'Figure_22_2_Pneumonia}
        

## Pneumococcal Pneumonia

The most common cause of community-acquired bacterial pneumonia is  *Streptococcus pneumoniae*. This gram-positive, alpha hemolytic streptococcus is commonly found as part of the normal microbiota of the human respiratory tract. The cells tend to be somewhat lancet-shaped and typically appear as pairs ({'Figure_22_2_Pneumococ Figure 22.2.Pneumococ}). The pneumococci initially colonize the bronchioles of the lungs. Eventually, the infection spreads to the alveoli, where the microbe’s polysaccharide capsule interferes with phagocytic clearance. Other virulence factors include  **autolysin**s like Lyt A, which degrade the microbial cell wall, resulting in cell lysis and the release of cytoplasmic virulence factors. One of these factors,  **pneumolysin O**, is important in disease progression; this pore-forming protein damages host cells, promotes bacterial adherence, and enhances pro-inflammatory cytokine production. The resulting inflammatory response causes the alveoli to fill with exudate rich in neutrophils and red blood cells. As a consequence, infected individuals develop a productive cough with bloody sputum.


{image:'Figure_22_2_Pneumococ}
        

Pneumococci can be presumptively identified by their distinctive gram-positive, lancet-shaped cell morphology and diplococcal arrangement. In blood agar cultures, the organism demonstrates alpha hemolytic colonies that are autolytic after 24 to 48 hours. In addition,  *S. pneumoniae* is extremely sensitive to optochin and colonies are rapidly destroyed by the addition of 10% solution of sodium deoxycholate. All clinical pneumococcal isolates are serotyped using the  **quellung reaction** with typing antisera produced by the CDC. Positive quellung reactions are considered definitive identification of pneumococci.

Antibiotics remain the mainstay treatment for pneumococci. β-Lactams like  **penicillin** are the first-line drugs, but resistance to β-lactams is a growing problem. When β-lactam resistance is a concern,  **macrolides** and  **fluoroquinolones** may be prescribed. However,  *S. pneumoniae* resistance to macrolides and fluoroquinolones is increasing as well, limiting the therapeutic options for some infections. There are currently two pneumococcal vaccines available:  **pneumococcal conjugate vaccine** (PCV13) and  **pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine** (PPSV23). These are generally given to the most vulnerable populations of individuals: children younger than 2 years and adults older than 65 years.

##  *Haemophilus* Pneumonia

Encapsulated strains of  **Haemophilus influenzae** are known for causing meningitis, but nonencapsulated strains are important causes of pneumonia. This small, gram-negative coccobacillus is found in the pharynx of the majority of healthy children; however,  *Haemophilus* pneumonia is primarily seen in the elderly. Like other pathogens that cause pneumonia,  *H. influenzae* is spread by droplets and aerosols produced by coughing. A fastidious organism,  *H. influenzae* will only grow on media with available factor X (hemin) and factor V (NAD), like  **chocolate agar** ({'Figure_22_2_HemoInflu Figure 22.2.HemoInflu}). Serotyping must be performed to confirm identity of  *H. influenzae* isolates.

Infections of the alveoli by  *H. influenzae* result in inflammation and accumulation of fluids. Increasing resistance to  **β-lactams**,  **macrolides**, and  **tetracyclines** presents challenges for the treatment of  *Haemophilus* pneumonia. Resistance to the  **fluoroquinolones** is rare among isolates of  *H. influenzae* but has been observed. As discussed for AOM, a vaccine directed against nonencapsulated  *H. influenzae,* if developed, would provide protection against pneumonia caused by this pathogen.


{image:'Figure_22_2_HemoInflu}
        

##  *Mycoplasma* Pneumonia (Walking Pneumonia)

Primary atypical pneumonia is caused by  **Mycoplasma pneumoniae**. This bacterium is not part of the respiratory tract’s normal microbiota and can cause epidemic disease outbreaks. Also known as walking pneumonia,  **mycoplasma pneumonia** infections are common in crowded environments like college campuses and military bases. It is spread by aerosols formed when coughing or sneezing. The disease is often mild, with a low fever and persistent cough. These bacteria, which do not have cell walls, use a specialized attachment organelle to bind to ciliated cells. In the process, epithelial cells are damaged and the proper function of the cilia is hindered ({'Figure_22_2_Mycoplasma Figure 22.2.Mycoplasma}).

Mycoplasma grow very slowly when cultured. Therefore,  **penicillin** and  **thallium acetate** are added to agar to prevent the overgrowth by faster-growing potential contaminants. Since  *M. pneumoniae* does not have a cell wall, it is resistant to these substances. Without a cell wall, the microbial cells appear pleomorphic.  *M. pneumoniae* infections tend to be self-limiting but may also respond well to macrolide antibiotic therapy. β-lactams, which target cell wall synthesis, are not indicated for treatment of infections with this pathogen.


{image:'Figure_22_2_Mycoplasma}
        

## Chlamydial Pneumonias and Psittacosis

Chlamydial pneumonia can be caused by three different species of bacteria:  **Chlamydophila pneumoniae** (formerly known as  *Chlamydia pneumoniae*),  **Chlamydophila psittaci** (formerly known as  *Chlamydia psittaci*), and  **Chlamydia trachomatis**. All three are obligate intracellular pathogens and cause mild to severe pneumonia and bronchitis. Of the three,  *Chlamydophila pneumoniae* is the most common and is transmitted via respiratory droplets or aerosols.  *C. psittaci* causes  **psittacosis**, a zoonotic disease that primarily affects domesticated birds such as parakeets, turkeys, and ducks, but can be transmitted from birds to humans. Psittacosis is a relatively rare infection and is typically found in people who work with birds.  *Chlamydia trachomatis,* the causative agent of the sexually transmitted disease chlamydia, can cause pneumonia in infants when the infection is passed from mother to baby during birth.

Diagnosis of chlamydia by culturing tends to be difficult and slow. Because they are intracellular pathogens, they require multiple passages through tissue culture. Recently, a variety of PCR- and serologically based tests have been developed to enable easier identification of these pathogens. Tetracycline and macrolide antibiotics are typically prescribed for treatment.

## Health Care-Associated Pneumonia

A variety of opportunistic bacteria that do not typically cause respiratory disease in healthy individuals are common causes of health care-associated pneumonia. These include  **Klebsiella pneumoniae**,  **Staphylococcus aureus**, and proteobacteria such as species of  *Escherichia*,  *Proteus*, and  *Serratia*. Patients at risk include the elderly, those who have other preexisting lung conditions, and those who are immunocompromised. In addition, patients receiving supportive therapies such as intubation, antibiotics, and immunomodulatory drugs may also be at risk because these interventions disrupt the mucociliary escalator and other pulmonary defenses. Invasive medical devices such as catheters, medical implants, and ventilators can also introduce opportunistic pneumonia-causing pathogens into the body.

Pneumonia caused by  *K. pneumoniae* is characterized by lung necrosis and “currant jelly sputum,” so named because it consists of clumps of blood, mucus, and debris from the thick polysaccharide capsule produced by the bacterium.  *K. pneumoniae* is often multidrug resistant. Aminoglycoside and cephalosporin are often prescribed but are not always effective.  *Klebsiella* pneumonia is frequently fatal even when treated.

##  *Pseudomonas* Pneumonia

 **Pseudomonas aeruginosa** is another opportunistic pathogen that can cause serious cases of bacterial pneumonia in patients with  **cystic fibrosis** (CF) and hospitalized patients assisted with artificial ventilators. This bacterium is extremely antibiotic resistant and can produce a variety of exotoxins. Ventilator-associated pneumonia with  *P. aeruginosa* is caused by contaminated equipment that causes the pathogen to be aspirated into the lungs. In patients with CF, a genetic defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor (CFTR) leads to the accumulation of excess dried mucus in the lungs. This decreases the effectiveness of the  **defensins** and inhibits the  **mucociliary escalator**.  *P. aeruginosa* is known to infect more than half of all patients with CF. It adapts to the conditions in the patient’s lungs and begins to produce alginate, a viscous exopolysaccharide that inhibits the mucociliary escalator. Lung damage from the chronic inflammatory response that ensues is the leading cause of mortality in patients with CF.
