index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * A wide variety of bacteria can cause respiratory diseases; most are treatable with antibiotics or preventable with vaccines.
  *  *Streptococcus pyogenes* causes  **strep throat**, an infection of the pharynx that also causes high fever and can lead to  **scarlet fever**,  **acute rheumatic fever**, and  **acute glomerulonephritis**.
  *  **Acute otitis media** is an infection of the middle ear that may be caused by several bacteria, including  *Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae,* and  *Moraxella catarrhalis*. The infection can block the eustachian tubes, leading to  **otitis media with effusion**.
  *  **Diphtheria**, caused by  *Corynebacterium diphtheriae*, is now a rare disease because of widespread vaccination. The bacteria produce exotoxins that kill cells in the pharynx, leading to the formation of a  **pseudomembrane**; and damage other parts of the body.
  *  **Bacterial**  **pneumonia** results from infections that cause inflammation and fluid accumulation in the alveoli. It is most commonly caused by  *S. pneumoniae* or  *H. influenzae*. The former is commonly multidrug resistant.
  *  **Mycoplasma pneumonia** results from infection by  *Mycoplasma pneumoniae*; it can spread quickly, but the disease is mild and self-limiting.
  *  **Chlamydial pneumonia** can be caused by three pathogens that are obligate intracellular parasites.  *Chlamydophila pneumoniae* is typically transmitted from an infected person, whereas  *C. psittaci* is typically transmitted from an infected bird.  *Chlamydia trachomatis*, may cause pneumonia in infants.
  * Several other bacteria can cause pneumonia in immunocompromised individuals and those with cystic fibrosis.
  *  **Tuberculosis** is caused by  *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*. Infection leads to the production of protective  **tubercles** in the alveoli and calcified  **Ghon complexes** that can harbor the bacteria for a long time. Antibiotic-resistant forms are common and treatment is typically long term.
  *  **Pertussis** is caused by  *Bordetella pertussis*. Mucus accumulation in the lungs leads to prolonged severe coughing episodes (whooping cough) that facilitate transmission. Despite an available vaccine, outbreaks are still common.
  *  **Legionnaires disease** is caused by infection from environmental reservoirs of the  *Legionella pneumophila* bacterium. The bacterium is endocytic within macrophages and infection can lead to pneumonia, particularly among immunocompromised individuals.
  *  **Q fever** is caused by  *Coxiella burnetii*, whose primary hosts are domesticated mammals (zoonotic disease). It causes pneumonia primarily in farm workers and can lead to serious complications, such as endocarditis.
