index: hide
name: Acute Otitis Media

An infection of the  **middle ear** is called  **acute otitis media** ( **AOM**), but often it is simply referred to as an earache. The condition is most common between ages 3 months and 3 years. In the United States, AOM is the second-leading cause of visits to pediatricians by children younger than age 5 years, and it is the leading indication for antibiotic prescription.

AOM is characterized by the formation and accumulation of pus in the middle ear. Unable to drain, the pus builds up, resulting in moderate to severe bulging of the tympanic membrane and otalgia (ear pain). Inflammation resulting from the infection leads to swelling of the eustachian tubes, and may also lead to fever, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea, particularly in infants. Infants and toddlers who cannot yet speak may exhibit nonverbal signs suggesting AOM, such as holding, tugging, or rubbing of the ear, as well as uncharacteristic crying or distress in response to the pain.

AOM can be caused by a variety of bacteria. Among neonates,  *S. pneumoniae* is the most common cause of AOM, but  **Escherichia coli**,  *Enterococcus* spp., and  **group B Streptococcus** species can also be involved. In older infants and children younger than 14 years old, the most common bacterial causes are  *S. pneumoniae*,  **Haemophilus influenzae**, or  **Moraxella catarrhalis**. Among  *S. pneumoniae* infections *,* encapsulated strains are frequent causes of AOM. By contrast, the strains of  *H. influenzae* and  *M. cattarhalis* that are responsible for AOM do not possess a capsule. Rather than direct tissue damage by these pathogens, bacterial components such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in gram-negative pathogens induce an inflammatory response that causes swelling, pus, and tissue damage within the middle ear ({'Figure_22_2_OtitisMed Figure 22.2.OtitisMed}).

Any blockage of the eustachian tubes, with or without infection, can cause fluid to become trapped and accumulate in the middle ear. This is referred to as  **otitis media with effusion (OME)**. The accumulated fluid offers an excellent reservoir for microbial growth and, consequently, secondary bacterial infections often ensue. This can lead to recurring and chronic earaches, which are especially common in young children. The higher incidence in children can be attributed to many factors. Children have more upper respiratory infections, in general, and their eustachian tubes are also shorter and drain at a shallower angle. Young children also tend to spend more time lying down than adults, which facilitates drainage from the nasopharynx through the eustachian tube and into the middle ear. Bottle feeding while lying down enhances this risk because the sucking action on the bottle causes negative pressure to build up within the eustachian tube, promoting the movement of fluid and bacteria from the nasopharynx.

Diagnosis is typically made based on clinical signs and symptoms, without laboratory testing to determine the specific causative agent. Antibiotics are frequently prescribed for the treatment of AOM. High-dose  **amoxicillin** is the first-line drug, but with increasing resistance concerns, macrolides and  **cephalosporin**s may also be used. The pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13) contains serotypes that are important causes of AOM, and vaccination has been shown to decrease the incidence of AOM. Vaccination against influenza has also been shown to decrease the risk for AOM, likely because viral infections like influenza predispose patients to secondary infections with  *S. pneumoniae*. Although there is a conjugate vaccine available for the invasive serotype B of  *H. influenzae*, this vaccine does not impact the incidence of  *H. influenzae* AOM. Because unencapsulated strains of  *H. influenzae* and  *M. catarrhalis* are involved in AOM, vaccines against bacterial cellular factors other than capsules will need to be developed.


{image:'Figure_22_2_OtitisMed}
        

## Bacterial Rhinosinusitis

The microbial community of the nasopharynx is extremely diverse and harbors many opportunistic pathogens, so it is perhaps not surprising that infections leading to  **rhinitis** and  **sinusitis** have many possible causes. These conditions often occur as secondary infections after a viral infection, which effectively compromises the immune defenses and allows the opportunistic bacteria to establish themselves. Bacterial sinusitis involves infection and inflammation within the paranasal sinuses. Because bacterial sinusitis rarely occurs without rhinitis, the preferred term is  **rhinosinusitis**. The most common causes of bacterial rhinosinusitis are similar to those for AOM, including  *S. pneumoniae*,  *H. influenzae*, and  *M. catarrhalis*.
