index: hide
name: Electrical Properties of Colloidal Particles

Dispersed colloidal particles are often electrically charged. A colloidal particle of iron(III) hydroxide, for example, does not contain enough hydroxide ions to compensate exactly for the positive charges on the iron(III) ions. Thus, each individual colloidal particle bears a positive charge, and the colloidal dispersion consists of charged colloidal particles and some free hydroxide ions, which keep the dispersion electrically neutral. Most metal hydroxide colloids have positive charges, whereas most metals and metal sulfides form negatively charged dispersions. All colloidal particles in any one system have charges of the same sign. This helps keep them dispersed because particles containing like charges repel each other.

We can take advantage of the charge on colloidal particles to remove them from a variety of mixtures. If we place a colloidal dispersion in a container with charged electrodes, positively charged particles, such as iron(III) hydroxide particles, would move to the negative electrode. There, the colloidal particles lose their charge and coagulate as a precipitate.

The carbon and dust particles in smoke are often colloidally dispersed and electrically charged. Frederick Cottrell, an American chemist, developed a process to remove these particles.

The charged particles are attracted to highly charged electrodes, where they are neutralized and deposited as dust ({'Figure_11_5_Cottrellp Figure 11.5.Cottrellp}). This is one of the important methods used to clean up the smoke from a variety of industrial processes. The process is also important in the recovery of valuable products from the smoke and flue dust of smelters, furnaces, and kilns. There are also ionic air filters designed for home use to improve indoor air quality.


{image:'Figure_11_5_Cottrellp}
        
