index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.4.4.1
title: 13.4.4.1 - Surface Mass Balance Change

Because the ice loss from Antarctica due to surface melt and {Glossary.*Runoff runoff} is about 1% of the total mass gain from snowfall, most ice loss occurs through solid ice discharge into the ocean. In the 21st century, ablation is projected to remain small on the Antarctic {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} because low {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} inhibit surface melting, except near the coast and on the Antarctic Peninsula, and meltwater and rain continue to freeze in the snowpack ({cite.13.'Ligtenberg_et_al_2013}). Projections of Antarctic SMB changes over the 21st century thus indicate a negative contribution to {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} because of the projected widespread increase in snowfall associated with warming air temperatures ({cite.13.'Krinner_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Uotila_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Bracegirdle_et_al_2008}). Several studies ({cite.13.'Krinner_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Uotila_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Bengtsson_et_al_2011}) have shown that the precipitation increase is directly linked to atmospheric warming via the increased moisture holding capacity of warmer air, and is therefore larger for {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} of greater warming. The relationship is exponential, resulting in an increase of SMB as a function of Antarctic SAT change evaluated in various recent studies with high-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} (~60 km) models as 3.7% °C–1 ({cite.13.'Bengtsson_et_al_2011}), 4.8% °C–1 ({cite.13.'Ligtenberg_et_al_2013}) and ~7% °C–1 ({cite.13.'Krinner_et_al_2007}). These agree well with the sensitivity of 5.1 ± 1.5% °C–1 (one standard deviation) of CMIP3 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} ({cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006}).

The effect of atmospheric circulation changes on continental-mean SMB is an order of magnitude smaller than the effect of warming, but circulation changes can have a large influence on regional changes in {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation}, particularly near the ice-sheet margins ({cite.13.'Uotila_et_al_2007}) where increased accumulation may induce additional ice flow across the {Glossary.*Grounding_line grounding line} (Huybrechts and De Wolde, 1999; {cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006}; {cite.13.'Winkelmann_et_al_2012}). Simulated SMB is strongly and nonlinearly influenced by ocean {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} and sea-ice conditions ({cite.13.'Swingedouw_et_al_2008}). This dependence means that the biases in the model-control climate may distort the SMB sensitivity to climate change, suggesting that more accurate {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} may be obtained from regional models by using boundary conditions constructed by combining observed present-day climate with projected climate change ({cite.13.'Krinner_et_al_2008}). There is a tendency for higher resolution models to simulate a stronger future precipitation increase because of better representation of coastal and orographic precipitation processes ({cite.13.'Genthon_et_al_2009}).

For the present assessment of GMSL rise, changes in Antarctic ice-sheet SMB up to 2100 have been computed from global mean SAT change {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} derived from the CMIP5 AOGCMs, using the range of sensitivities of precipitation increase to atmospheric warming summarized above, and the ratio of Antarctic to global warming evaluated from CMIP3 AOGCMs by {cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006 Gregory and Huybrechts (2006)} (see also {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_1 Section 13.5.1} and Supplementary Material). The results are shown in {'Table_13_5 Table 13.5} and Figures {'Figure_13_10 13.10} and {'Figure_13_11 13.11}. The projected change in ice outflow is affected by the SMB because of the influence of topography on ice dynamics ({Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 Section 13.4.4.2} and Supplementary Material). {Glossary.*Ozone Ozone} recovery, through its influence on atmospheric circulation at high southern latitudes ({Chapters.10.10_3.10_3_3.10_3_3_3 Section 10.3.3.3}), may offset some effects of GHG increase in the 21st century, but Antarctic precipitation is nonetheless projected to increase ({cite.13.'Polvani_et_al_2011}). {cite.13.'Bintanja_et_al_2013 Bintanja et al. (2013)} suggested that Antarctic warming and precipitation increase may be suppressed in the future by expansion of Antarctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}, promoted by freshening of the surface ocean, caused by basal melting of ice shelves, and they conducted an AOGCM sensitivity test of this hypothesis. We consider these possibilities in {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_3 Section 13.5.3}.

Beyond the year 2100, {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} simulations run at high spatial resolution (5 to 55 km) but without climate-ice sheet feedbacks included show a net ice gain until the year 2200 ({cite.13.'Ligtenberg_et_al_2013}). During the 22nd century, the ice gain is equivalent to an average rate of sea level fall of 1.2 mm yr–1 for the A1B scenario and 0.46 mm yr–1 for the E1 scenario.

For multi-centennial to multi-millennial projections, feedbacks between the ice sheet and regional climate need to be accounted for. This is currently done using ice-sheet models coupled to {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} of intermediate complexity, which have a significantly lower spatial resolution in the atmospheric component than regional climate models used to assess future SMB within the 21st century. These coarser resolution models capture the increase in snowfall under future warming, but the regional distribution is represented less accurately. Accordingly, there is low confidence in their ability to model spatial melting and accumulation patterns accurately. In contrast, medium confidence can be assigned to the models’ {Glossary.*Projection projection} of total accumulation on Antarctica, as it is controlled by the large-scale moisture transport toward the continent.

In idealized scenarios of 1% increase of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} yr–1 up to 560 ppm with subsequent stabilization, Vizcaíno et al. (2010) and {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)} found an initial increase of ice volume due to additional snowfall during the first 600 years of integration. In both models, the changes in SMB dominate the mass changes during and beyond the first 100 years. After 600 years of integration, Vizcaíno et al. (2010) found a mass gain corresponding to a sea level fall of 0.15 m (–0.25 mm yr–1 on average). For the same experiment and the same period, {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)} found a sea level fall of 0.08 m (–0.13 mm yr–1 on average).

In a similar experiment but allowing GHG concentrations to reach 1120 ppm CO2 before being stabilized, both models show a net positive sea level contribution after 600 years of integration. {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)} found a weak sea level contribution during the first 500 years of integration followed by a stronger and relatively constant long-term average rate of ~2 mm yr–1 after 1000 years of integration up to a total contribution of ~4 m {Glossary.*Sea_level_equivalent SLE} after 3000 years of integration. Although they found some grounding line retreat due to basal ice-shelf melt, the multi-centennial evolution of the ice sheet is dominated by changes in SMB whereas the solid-ice discharge after an initial increase shows a significant decrease during the scenario.

For the same scenario, Vizcaíno et al. (2010) found that the initial mass gain is followed by a weak mass loss. After 250 years of integration, the contribution is stronger and relatively constant at a rate of about 3 mm yr–1, corresponding to a net contribution of 1.2 m to global {Glossary.*Mean_sea_level mean sea level} rise after 600 years.

The same model as in {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)}, although with a slightly stronger polar amplification, was applied to the three {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} used in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} (B1, A1B, A2) with stabilization in the year 2100 ({cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2012}). For the lowest scenario (B1), they found practically no net Antarctic contribution to sea level in the year 3000. Under the medium scenario (A1B), the ice sheet contributes 0.26 m, and under the highest scenario (A2), it contributes 0.94 m SLE in the year 3000.

These simulations include a negative {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} on the regional climate by ice-sheet melt through which summer temperatures can be significantly reduced over Antarctica ({cite.13.'Swingedouw_et_al_2008}). However, due to the coarse resolution and the high polar amplification, there is low confidence in the model’s representation of oceanic circulation changes around Antarctica.

In both models (Vizcaíno et al., 2010; {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011}), the ice sheets are not equilibrated with the surrounding climate after the integration period under the 1120 ppm CO2 {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}. Though GHG concentrations were stabilized after 120 years of integration, the Antarctic ice sheet continues to contribute to sea level rise at a relatively constant rate for another 480 years in Vizcaíno et al. (2010) and 2880 years in {cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011 Huybrechts et al. (2011)}. This is consistent with a positive sea level contribution from Antarctica during past warmer climates (Sections {Chapters.13.13_2.13_2_1 13.2.1} and {Chapters.13.13_5.13_5_4 13.5.4}).

In summary, both coupled ice sheet-climate models consistently show that for high-{Topics.*Emissions emission} scenarios, the surface melt increases and leads to an ice loss on multi-centennial time scales. The long time period over which the Antarctic ice sheet continues to lose mass indicates a potential role of the feedback between climate and ice sheet. Consistent with regional climate models for the 21st and 22nd centuries, both coarse-resolution coupled models show a positive SMB change for most of the first 100 years of climate change. Due to the inertia in the climate system, regional temperatures continue to rise after that. Together with enhanced solid ice discharge, this results in mass loss of the ice sheet. The corresponding decline in surface elevation increases the surface temperature and leads to additional ice loss.
