index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.5.4.2
title: 13.5.4.2 - Multi-Millennial Projections

Here sea level commitment in response to a {Topics.*Surface_Temperature global mean temperature} increase on a multi-millennial time scale is assessed. {'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14} shows the sea level rise after several millennia of constant global mean temperature increase above pre-industrial. The {Glossary.*Thermal_expansion thermal expansion} of the ocean was taken from 1000-year integrations with six coupled {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} as used in the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} (models Bern2D, CGoldstein, CLIMate and BiosphERe-2 (CLIMBER-2), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), MoBidiC, and Loch-Vecode-Ecbilt-CLio-agIsm Model (LOVECLIM) in Figure 10.34 in {cite.13.'Meehl_et_al_2007 Meehl et al. (2007)}). These yield a rate of {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change} in the range of 0.20 to 0.63 m °C–1 ({'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}a). For reference, a spatially uniform increase of ocean temperature yields a global {Glossary.*Mean_sea_level mean sea level} rise of 0.38 m °C–1 when added to observed data ({cite.13.'Levitus_et_al_2009}) (black dots in {'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}a). {Topics.*Uncertainty Uncertainty} arises due to the different spatial distribution of the warming in models and the dependence of the expansion on local temperature and salinity. The contribution for glaciers was obtained with the models from Mazeion et al. (2012a) and Radic and Hock (2011) by integration with fixed boundary conditions corresponding to different global mean SAT levels for 3000 years.

{image:'Figure_13_14}

As detailed in Sections {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_2 13.4.3.2} and {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_4.13_4_4_2 13.4.4.2}, there is low confidence in the ability of current Antarctic ice-sheet models to capture the temporal response to changes in {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} on a decadal to centennial time scale. On multi-centennial to multi-millennial time scales, however, these models can be validated against paleo sea level records. The contributions from the Greenland {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} were computed with a dynamic ice-sheet model coupled to an energy-moisture balance model for the SMB ({cite.13.'Robinson_et_al_2012}). The model’s parameters were constrained by comparison with SMB estimates and topographic data for the present day and with estimated summit-elevation changes from ice-core records for the Last Interglacial period ({Glossary.*Last_Interglacial LIG}), in order to ensure that the coupled model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} has a realistic sensitivity to climatic change. The parameter spread leads to a spread in ice-sheet responses (dark green lines in {'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}c). The contribution to sea level commitment from the Greenland ice sheet is relatively weak (on average 0.18 m °C–1 up to 1°C and 0.34 m °C–1 between 2°C and 4°C) apart from the abrupt threshold of ice loss between 0.8°C and 2.2°C above pre-industrial (90% confidence interval in the particular model calculations reported here) ({'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}c). This represents a change from a fully ice-covered Greenland to an essentially ice-free state, reducing the ice sheet to around 10% of present-day volume and raising sea level by over 6 m ({cite.13.'Ridley_et_al_2005}; {cite.13.'Ridley_et_al_2010}). The threshold temperature is lower than estimates obtained from the assumption that the threshold coincides with a negative total SMB of the Greenland ice sheet (see {Chapters.13.13_4.13_4_3.13_4_3_3 Section 13.4.3.3} for a more complete discussion).

The Antarctic ice sheet contribution comes from a simulation of the last 5 million years ({cite.13.'Pollard_and_DeConto_2009}), which is in good agreement with regional paleo records ({cite.13.'Naish_et_al_2009}). The sensitivity of the ice sheet was extracted from this model simulation by correlating the ice volume with the global mean temperature which forces the simulation. The standard deviation of the resulting scatter is used as a measure of uncertainty ({'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}d). Uncertainty arises from uncertainty in the forcing data, the ice physics representation, and from the time-dependent nature of the simulation. For example, the existence of hysteresis behavior on the sub-continental scale can lead to different contributions for the same temperature increase. The Antarctic ice sheet shows a relatively constant commitment of 1.2 m °C–1. Paleorecords indicate that a potential hysteresis behaviour of East Antarctica requires a temperature increase above 4°C and is thereby outside of the scope discussed here ({cite.13.'Foster_and_Rohling_2013}).

In order to compare the model results with past sea level anomalies for the temperature range up to 4°C, we focus on the three previous periods of warmer climates and higher sea levels than pre-industrial that were assessed in Sections {Chapters.5.5_6.5_6_1 5.6.1}, {Chapters.5.5_6.5_6_2 5.6.2} and {Chapters.13.13_2.13_2_1 13.2.1}: the middle {Glossary.*Pliocene Pliocene}, MIS 11, and the LIG ({'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}e). In each case, there is reasonable agreement between the model result of a long-term sea level response for a given temperature with the information from the paleo record.

The ability of the physical models to reproduce paleo sea level records on a multi-millennial time scale provides confidence in applying them to millennial time frames. After 2000 years, the sea level contribution will be largely independent of the exact warming path during the first century. As can be seen from Figure 10.34 of AR4, the oceanic heat content will be largely equilibrated after 2000 years; the same is true for the {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} component. The situation for Antarctica is slightly more complicated, but as can be inferred from {cite.13.'Pollard_and_DeConto_2009 Pollard and DeConto (2009)}, much of the retreat of the West Antarctic ice sheet will have already occurred by 2000 years, especially if the warming occurs on a decadal to centennial time scale. The opposite and smaller {Glossary.*Trend trend} in East Antarctic ice volume due to increased snowfall in a warmer environment will also have largely equilibrated ({cite.13.'Uotila_et_al_2007}; {cite.13.'Winkelmann_et_al_2012}).

The most significant difference arises from the contribution of the Greenland ice sheet. Consistent with previous estimates ({cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2012}), the rate of the sea level contribution from Greenland increases with temperature. The transient simulations for an instantaneous temperature increase show a quasi-quadratic dependence of the sea level contribution on this temperature increase after 2000 years ({'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}h) (Robinson et al. 2012). The results are quantitatively consistent with previous estimates on a millennial time scale ({cite.13.'Huybrechts_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Goelzer_et_al_2012}). The sea level contribution of the Greenland ice sheet after 2000 years of integration at 560 ppm was plotted against the average Greenland temperature divided by the standard polar amplification of 1.5 between global mean and Greenland mean temperature increase ({cite.13.'Gregory_and_Huybrechts_2006}, black dot in {'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}h). Taken together, these results imply that a sea level rise of 1 to 3 m °C–1 is expected if the warming is sustained for several millennia (low confidence) ({'Figure_13_14 Figure 13.14}e, 13.14j).
