index: hide
name: The Role of Public Health Organizations

The main national public health agency in the United States is the  **Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)**, an agency of the Department of Health and Human Services. The CDC is charged with protecting the public from disease and injury. One way that the CDC carries out this mission is by overseeing the  **National Notifiable Disease Surveillance System** (NNDSS) in cooperation with regional, state, and territorial public health departments. The NNDSS monitors diseases considered to be of public health importance on a national scale. Such diseases are called  **notifiable disease** **s** or  **reportable disease** **s** because all cases must be reported to the CDC. A physician treating a patient with a notifiable disease is legally required to submit a report on the case. Notifiable diseases include  **HIV** infection,  **measles**,  **West Nile virus** infections, and many others. Some states have their own lists of notifiable diseases that include diseases beyond those on the CDC’s list.

Notifiable diseases are tracked by epidemiological studies and the data is used to inform health-care providers and the public about possible risks. The CDC publishes the  **Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR)**, which provides physicians and health-care workers with updates on public health issues and the latest data pertaining to notifiable diseases.  is an example of the kind of data contained in the  *MMWR*.


****

| Disease | Current Week (Jan 2, 2016) | Median of Previous 52 Weeks | Maximum of Previous 52 Weeks | Cumulative Cases 2015 |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Campylobacteriosis | 406 | 869 | 1,385 | 46,618 |
|  *Chlamydia trachomatis* infection | 11,024 | 28,562 | 31,089 | 1,425,303 |
| Giardiasis | 115 | 230 | 335 | 11,870 |
| Gonorrhea | 3,207 | 7,155 | 8,283 | 369,926 |
    
