index: hide
name: Analyzing Disease in a Population

Epidemiological analyses are always carried out with reference to a population, which is the group of individuals that are at risk for the disease or condition. The population can be defined geographically, but if only a portion of the individuals in that area are susceptible, additional criteria may be required. Susceptible individuals may be defined by particular behaviors, such as intravenous drug use, owning particular pets, or membership in an institution, such as a college. Being able to define the population is important because most measures of interest in epidemiology are made with reference to the size of the population.

The state of being diseased is called  **morbidity**. Morbidity in a population can be expressed in a few different ways. Morbidity or total morbidity is expressed in numbers of individuals without reference to the size of the population. The  **morbidity rate** can be expressed as the number of diseased individuals out of a standard number of individuals in the population, such as 100,000, or as a percent of the population.

There are two aspects of morbidity that are relevant to an epidemiologist: a disease’s  **prevalence** and its  **incidence**. Prevalence is the number, or proportion, of individuals with a particular illness in a given population at a point in time. For example, the  **Centers for Disease Control and Prevention** (CDC) estimated that in 2012, there were about 1.2 million people 13 years and older with an active human immunodeficiency virus ( **HIV**) infection. Expressed as a proportion, or rate, this is a prevalence of 467 infected persons per 100,000 in the population. On the other hand, incidence is the number or proportion of  *new* cases in a period of time. For the same year and population, the CDC estimates that there were 43,165 newly diagnosed cases of HIV infection, which is an incidence of 13.7 new cases per 100,000 in the population. The relationship between incidence and prevalence can be seen in {'Figure_16_1_incprev Figure 16.1.incprev}. For a chronic disease like HIV infection, prevalence will generally be higher than incidence because it represents the cumulative number of new cases over many years minus the number of cases that are no longer active (e.g., because the patient died or was cured).

In addition to morbidity rates, the incidence and prevalence of  **mortality** (death) may also be reported. A  **mortality rate** can be expressed as the percentage of the population that has died from a disease or as the number of deaths per 100,000 persons (or other suitable standard number).


{image:'Figure_16_1_incprev}
        
