index: hide
name: Plasma Membrane

The plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells is similar in structure to the prokaryotic plasma membrane in that it is composed mainly of phospholipids forming a bilayer with embedded peripheral and integral proteins ({'Figure_3_4_EukPlasMem Figure 3.4.EukPlasMem}). These membrane components move within the plane of the membrane according to the fluid mosaic model. However, unlike the prokaryotic membrane,  **eukaryotic membranes** contain  **sterols**, including cholesterol, that alter membrane fluidity. Additionally, many eukaryotic cells contain some specialized lipids, including sphingolipids, which are thought to play a role in maintaining membrane stability as well as being involved in signal transduction pathways and cell-to-cell communication.


{image:'Figure_3_4_EukPlasMem}
        

## Membrane Transport Mechanisms

The processes of  **simple diffusion**,  **facilitated diffusion**, and  **active transport** are used in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells. However, eukaryotic cells also have the unique ability to perform various types of  **endocytosis**, the uptake of matter through plasma membrane invagination and vacuole/vesicle formation ({'Figure_3_4_Endocytos Figure 3.4.Endocytos}). A type of endocytosis involving the engulfment of large particles through membrane invagination is called  **phagocytosis**, which means “cell eating.” In phagocytosis, particles (or other cells) are enclosed in a pocket within the membrane, which then pinches off from the membrane to form a vacuole that completely surrounds the particle. Another type of endocytosis is called  **pinocytosis**, which means “cell drinking.” In pinocytosis, small, dissolved materials and liquids are taken into the cell through small vesicles. Saprophytic fungi, for example, obtain their nutrients from dead and decaying matter largely through pinocytosis.

 **Receptor-mediated endocytosis** is a type of endocytosis that is initiated by specific molecules called ligands when they bind to cell surface receptors on the membrane. Receptor-mediated endocytosis is the mechanism that peptide and amine-derived hormones use to enter cells and is also used by various viruses and bacteria for entry into host cells.


{image:'Figure_3_4_Endocytos}
        

The process by which secretory vesicles release their contents to the cell’s exterior is called  **exocytosis**. Vesicles move toward the plasma membrane and then meld with the membrane, ejecting their contents out of the cell. Exocytosis is used by cells to remove waste products and may also be used to release chemical signals that can be taken up by other cells.
