index: hide
name: Endomembrane System

The  **endomembrane system**, unique to eukaryotic cells, is a series of membranous tubules, sacs, and flattened disks that synthesize many cell components and move materials around within the cell ({'Figure_3_4_Endomemb Figure 3.4.Endomemb}). Because of their larger cell size, eukaryotic cells require this system to transport materials that cannot be dispersed by diffusion alone. The endomembrane system comprises several organelles and connections between them, including the endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, lysosomes, and vesicles.


{image:'Figure_3_4_Endomemb}
        

## Endoplasmic Reticulum

The  **endoplasmic reticulum (ER)** is an interconnected array of tubules and  **cisternae** (flattened sacs) with a single lipid bilayer ({'Figure_3_4_ER Figure 3.4.ER}). The spaces inside of the cisternae are called  **lumen** of the ER. There are two types of ER,  **rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER)** and  **smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER)**. These two different types of ER are sites for the synthesis of distinctly different types of molecules. RER is studded with ribosomes bound on the cytoplasmic side of the membrane. These ribosomes make proteins destined for the plasma membrane ({'Figure_3_4_ER Figure 3.4.ER}). Following synthesis, these proteins are inserted into the membrane of the RER. Small sacs of the RER containing these newly synthesized proteins then bud off as  **transport vesicles** and move either to the Golgi apparatus for further processing, directly to the plasma membrane, to the membrane of another organelle, or out of the cell. Transport vesicles are single-lipid, bilayer, membranous spheres with hollow interiors that carry molecules. SER does not have ribosomes and, therefore, appears “smooth.” It is involved in biosynthesis of lipids, carbohydrate metabolism, and detoxification of toxic compounds within the cell.


{image:'Figure_3_4_ER}
        

## Golgi Apparatus

The Golgi apparatus was discovered within the endomembrane system in 1898 by Italian scientist Camillo  **Golgi** (1843–1926), who developed a novel staining technique that showed stacked membrane structures within the cells of  *Plasmodium*, the causative agent of malaria. The  **Golgi apparatus** is composed of a series of membranous disks called dictyosomes, each having a single lipid bilayer, that are stacked together ({'Figure_3_4_Golgi Figure 3.4.Golgi}).

Enzymes in the Golgi apparatus modify lipids and proteins transported from the ER to the Golgi, often adding carbohydrate components to them, producing glycolipids, glycoproteins, or proteoglycans. Glycolipids and glycoproteins are often inserted into the plasma membrane and are important for signal recognition by other cells or infectious particles. Different types of cells can be distinguished from one another by the structure and arrangement of the glycolipids and glycoproteins contained in their plasma membranes. These glycolipids and glycoproteins commonly also serve as cell surface receptors.

Transport vesicles leaving the ER fuse with a Golgi apparatus on its receiving, or  *cis*, face. The proteins are processed within the Golgi apparatus, and then additional transport vesicles containing the modified proteins and lipids pinch off from the Golgi apparatus on its outgoing, or  *trans*, face. These outgoing vesicles move to and fuse with the plasma membrane or the membrane of other organelles.

Exocytosis is the process by which  **secretory vesicles** (spherical membranous sacs) release their contents to the cell’s exterior ({'Figure_3_4_Golgi Figure 3.4.Golgi}). All cells have  **constitutive secretory pathways** in which secretory vesicles transport soluble proteins that are released from the cell continually (constitutively). Certain specialized cells also have  **regulated secretory pathways**, which are used to store soluble proteins in secretory vesicles. Regulated secretion involves substances that are only released in response to certain events or signals. For example, certain cells of the human immune system (e.g., mast cells) secrete histamine in response to the presence of foreign objects or pathogens in the body. Histamine is a compound that triggers various mechanisms used by the immune system to eliminate pathogens.


{image:'Figure_3_4_Golgi}
        

## Lysosomes

In the 1960s, Belgian scientist Christian  **de Duve** (1917–2013) discovered  **lysosomes**, membrane-bound organelles of the endomembrane system that contain digestive enzymes. Certain types of eukaryotic cells use lysosomes to break down various particles, such as food, damaged organelles or cellular debris, microorganisms, or immune complexes. Compartmentalization of the digestive enzymes within the lysosome allows the cell to efficiently digest matter without harming the cytoplasmic components of the cell.
