index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Eukaryotic cells are defined by the presence of a  **nucleus** containing the DNA genome and bound by a  **nuclear membrane** (or  **nuclear envelope**) composed of two lipid bilayers that regulate transport of materials into and out of the nucleus through nuclear pores.
  * Eukaryotic cell morphologies vary greatly and may be maintained by various structures, including the cytoskeleton, the cell membrane, and/or the cell wall
  * The  **nucleolus**, located in the nucleus of eukaryotic cells, is the site of ribosomal synthesis and the first stages of ribosome assembly.
  * Eukaryotic cells contain  **80S ribosomes** in the rough endoplasmic reticulum ( **membrane bound-ribosomes**) and cytoplasm ( **free ribosomes**). They contain 70s ribosomes in mitochondria and chloroplasts.
  * Eukaryotic cells have evolved an  **endomembrane** system, containing membrane-bound organelles involved in transport. These include vesicles, the endoplasmic reticulum, and the Golgi apparatus.
  * The  **smooth endoplasmic reticulum** plays a role in lipid biosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism, and detoxification of toxic compounds. The  **rough endoplasmic reticulum** contains membrane-bound 80S ribosomes that synthesize proteins destined for the cell membrane
  * The  **Golgi apparatus** processes proteins and lipids, typically through the addition of sugar molecules, producing glycoproteins or glycolipids, components of the plasma membrane that are used in cell-to-cell communication.
  *  **Lysosomes** contain digestive enzymes that break down small particles ingested by  **endocytosis**, large particles or cells ingested by  **phagocytosis**, and damaged intracellular components.
  * The  **cytoskeleton**, composed of  **microfilaments**,  **intermediate filaments**, and  **microtubules**, provides structural support in eukaryotic cells and serves as a network for transport of intracellular materials.
  *  **Centrosomes** are microtubule-organizing centers important in the formation of the mitotic spindle in mitosis.
  *  **Mitochondria** are the site of cellular respiration. They have two membranes: an outer membrane and an inner membrane with cristae. The mitochondrial matrix, within the inner membrane, contains the mitochondrial DNA, 70S ribosomes, and metabolic enzymes.
  * The plasma membrane of eukaryotic cells is structurally similar to that found in prokaryotic cells, and membrane components move according to the fluid mosaic model. However, eukaryotic membranes contain sterols, which alter membrane fluidity, as well as glycoproteins and glycolipids, which help the cell recognize other cells and infectious particles.
  * In addition to active transport and passive transport, eukaryotic cell membranes can take material into the cell via  **endocytosis**, or expel matter from the cell via  **exocytosis.**
  * Cells of fungi, algae, plants, and some protists have a  **cell wall,** whereas cells of animals and some protozoans have a sticky  **extracellular matrix** that provides structural support and mediates cellular signaling.
  * Eukaryotic flagella are structurally distinct from prokaryotic flagella but serve a similar purpose (locomotion).  **Cilia** are structurally similar to eukaryotic flagella, but shorter; they may be used for locomotion, feeding, or movement of extracellular particles.
