index: hide
name: Producing Monoclonal Antibodies

Some types of assays require better antibody specificity and affinity than can be obtained using a polyclonal antiserum. To attain this high specificity, all of the antibodies must bind with high affinity to a single epitope. This high specificity can be provided by  **monoclonal antibodies (mAbs)**.  compares some of the important characteristics of monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies.

Unlike polyclonal antibodies, which are produced in live animals, monoclonal antibodies are produced  *in vitro* using tissue-culture techniques. mAbs are produced by immunizing an animal, often a mouse, multiple times with a specific antigen. B cells from the spleen of the immunized animal are then removed. Since normal B cells are unable to proliferate forever, they are fused with immortal, cancerous B cells called myeloma cells, to yield  **hybridoma** cells. All of the cells are then placed in a selective medium that allows only the hybridomas to grow; unfused myeloma cells cannot grow, and any unfused B cells die off. The hybridomas, which are capable of growing continuously in culture while producing antibodies, are then screened for the desired mAb. Those producing the desired mAb are grown in tissue culture; the culture medium is harvested periodically and mAbs are purified from the medium. This is a very expensive and time-consuming process. It may take weeks of culturing and many liters of media to provide enough mAbs for an experiment or to treat a single patient. mAbs are expensive ({'Figure_20_1_mabprod Figure 20.1.mabprod}).


{image:'Figure_20_1_mabprod}
        


****

| Monoclonal Antibodies | Polyclonal Antibodies |
|:-:|:-:|
| Expensive production | Inexpensive production |
| Long production time | Rapid production |
| Large quantities of specific antibodies | Large quantities of nonspecific antibodies |
| Recognize a single epitope on an antigen | Recognize multiple epitopes on an antigen |
| Production is continuous and uniform once the hybridoma is made | Different batches vary in composition |
    
