index: hide
name: Section Summary

The flower contains the reproductive structures of a plant. All complete flowers contain four whorls: the calyx, corolla, androecium, and gynoecium. The stamens are made up of anthers, in which pollen grains are produced, and a supportive strand called the filament. The pollen contains two cells— a generative cell and a tube cell—and is covered by two layers called the intine and the exine. The carpels, which are the female reproductive structures, consist of the stigma, style, and ovary. The female gametophyte is formed from mitotic divisions of the megaspore, forming an eight-nuclei ovule sac. This is covered by a layer known as the integument. The integument contains an opening called the micropyle, through which the pollen tube enters the embryo sac.

The diploid sporophyte of angiosperms and gymnosperms is the conspicuous and long-lived stage of the life cycle.  The sporophytes differentiate specialized reproductive structures called sporangia, which are dedicated to the production of spores.  The microsporangium contains microspore mother cells, which divide by meiosis to produce haploid microspores.  The microspores develop into male gametophytes that are released as pollen.  The megasporangium contains megaspore mother cells, which divide by meiosis to produce haploid megaspores.  A megaspore develops into a female gametophyte containing a haploid egg.  A new diploid sporophyte is formed when a male gamete from a pollen grain enters the ovule sac and fertilizes this egg.
