index: hide
name: Tissue Transplantation

Tissue transplantation is more complicated than blood transfusions because of two characteristics of MHC molecules. These molecules are the major cause of transplant rejection (hence the name “histocompatibility”).  **MHC polygeny** refers to the multiple MHC proteins on cells, and  **MHC polymorphism** refers to the multiple alleles for each individual MHC locus. Thus, there are many alleles in the human population that can be expressed ( and ). When a donor organ expresses MHC molecules that are different from the recipient, the latter will often mount a cytotoxic T cell response to the organ and reject it. Histologically, if a biopsy of a transplanted organ exhibits massive infiltration of T lymphocytes within the first weeks after transplant, it is a sign that the transplant is likely to fail. The response is a classical, and very specific, primary T cell immune response. As far as medicine is concerned, the immune response in this scenario does the patient no good at all and causes significant harm.


****

| Gene | # of alleles | # of possible MHC I protein components |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| A | 2132 | 1527 |
| B | 2798 | 2110 |
| C | 1672 | 1200 |
| E | 11 | 3 |
| F | 22 | 4 |
| G | 50 | 16 |
    


****

| Gene | # of alleles | # of possible MHC II protein components |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| DRA | 7 | 2 |
| DRB | 1297 | 958 |
| DQA1 | 49 | 31 |
| DQB1 | 179 | 128 |
| DPA1 | 36 | 18 |
| DPB1 | 158 | 136 |
| DMA | 7 | 4 |
| DMB | 13 | 7 |
| DOA | 12 | 3 |
| DOB | 13 | 5 |
    

Immunosuppressive drugs such as cyclosporine A have made transplants more successful, but matching the MHC molecules is still key. In humans, there are six MHC molecules that show the most polymorphisms, three class I molecules (A, B, and C) and three class II molecules called DP, DQ, and DR. A successful transplant usually requires a match between at least 3–4 of these molecules, with more matches associated with greater success. Family members, since they share a similar genetic background, are much more likely to share MHC molecules than unrelated individuals do. In fact, due to the extensive polymorphisms in these MHC molecules, unrelated donors are found only through a worldwide database. The system is not foolproof however, as there are not enough individuals in the system to provide the organs necessary to treat all patients needing them.

One disease of transplantation occurs with bone marrow transplants, which are used to treat various diseases, including SCID and leukemia. Because the bone marrow cells being transplanted contain lymphocytes capable of mounting an immune response, and because the recipient’s immune response has been destroyed before receiving the transplant, the donor cells may attack the recipient tissues, causing  **graft-versus-host disease**. Symptoms of this disease, which usually include a rash and damage to the liver and mucosa, are variable, and attempts have been made to moderate the disease by first removing mature T cells from the donor bone marrow before transplanting it.
