index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.3.1
title: 4.2.3.1 - Total Antarctic Sea Ice Extent and Concentration

{'Figure_4_7 Figure 4.7}a shows the seasonal variability of Antarctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} extent using 34 years of satellite passive microwave data updated from {cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008 Comiso and Nishio (2008)}. In contrast to the Arctic, decadal monthly averages almost overlap with each other, and the seasonal variability of the total Antarctic sea ice cover has not changed much over the period. In winter, the values for the 1999–2008 decade were slightly higher than those of the other decades; whereas in autumn the values for 1989–1998 and 1999–2008 decades were higher than those of 1979–1988. There was more seasonal variability in the period 2009– 2012 than for earlier decadal periods, with relatively high values in late autumn, winter and spring.

{image:'Figure_4_7}

{Glossary.*Trend Trend} maps for winter, spring, summer and autumn extent are presented in {'Figure_4_7 Figure 4.7} (b, c, d and e respectively). The seasonal trends are significant mainly near the ice edge, with the values alternating between positive and negative around Antarctica. Such an alternating pattern is similar to that described previously as the Antarctic Circumpolar Wave (ACW) ({cite.4.'White_and_Peterson_1996}) but the ACW may not be associated with the trends because the trends have been strongly positive in the Ross Sea and negative in the Bellingshausen/Amundsen seas but with almost no trend in the other regions ({cite.4.'Comiso_et_al_2011}). In the winter, negative trends are evident at the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula and the western part of the Weddell Sea, while positive trends are prevalent in the Ross Sea. The patterns in spring are very similar to those of winter, whereas in summer and autumn negative trends are mainly confined to the Bellingshausen/Amundsen seas, while positive trends are dominant in the Ross Sea and the Weddell Sea.

The regression trend in the monthly anomalies of Antarctic sea ice extent from November 1978 to December 2012 (updated from {cite.4.'Comiso_and_Nishio_2008}) is slightly positive, at 1.5 ± 0.3% per decade, or 0.13 to 0.20 million km2 per decade (very likely) (see {FAQ_4_1 FAQ 4.1}). The seasonal trends in ice extent are 1.2 ± 0.5%, 1.0 ± 0.5%, 2.5 ± 2.0% and 3.0 ± 2.0% per decade (very likely) in winter, spring, summer and autumn, respectively, as updated from {cite.4.'Comiso_et_al_2011 Comiso et al. (2011)}. The corresponding trends in ice area (also updated) are 1.9 ± 0.7%, 1.6 ± 0.5%, 3.0 ± 2.1%, and 4.4 ± 2.3% per decade (very likely). The values are all positive, with the largest trends occurring in the autumn. The trends are consistently higher for ice area than ice extent, indicating less open water (possibly due to less storms and divergence) within the pack in later years. Trends reported by {cite.4.'Parkinson_and_Cavalieri_2012 Parkinson and Cavalieri (2012)} using data from 1978 to 2010 are slightly different, in part because they cover a different time period (see Supplementary Material). The overall interannual trends for various sectors around Antarctica are given in {FAQ_4_1 FAQ 4.1}, and show large regional variability. Changes in ice drift and wind patterns as reported by {cite.4.'Holland_and_Kwok_2012 Holland and Kwok (2012)} may be related to this phenomenon.
