index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  * Amino acids are small molecules essential to all life. Each has an α carbon to which a hydrogen atom, carboxyl group, and amine group are bonded. The fourth bonded group, represented by  *R,* varies in chemical composition, size, polarity, and charge among different amino acids, providing variation in properties.
  *  **Peptides** are polymers formed by the linkage of amino acids via dehydration synthesis. The bonds between the linked amino acids are called  **peptide bonds.** The number of amino acids linked together may vary from a few to many.
  *  **Proteins** are polymers formed by the linkage of a very large number of amino acids. They perform many important functions in a cell, serving as nutrients and enzymes; storage molecules for carbon, nitrogen, and energy; and structural components.
  * The structure of a protein is a critical determinant of its function and is described by a graduated classification:  **primary**,  **secondary**,  **tertiary**, and  **quaternary**. The  **native structure** of a protein may be disrupted by  **denaturation**, resulting in loss of its higher-order structure and its biological function.
  * Some proteins are formed by several separate protein subunits, the interaction of these subunits composing the  **quaternary structure** of the protein complex.
  *  **Conjugated proteins** have a nonpolypeptide portion that can be a carbohydrate (forming a  **glycoprotein**) or a lipid fraction (forming a  **lipoprotein**). These proteins are important components of membranes.
