index: hide
name: Amino Acids and Peptide Bonds

An  **amino acid** is an organic molecule in which a hydrogen atom, a  **carboxyl group** (–COOH), and an amino group (–NH<sub>2</sub>) are all bonded to the same carbon atom, the so-called  **α carbon**. The fourth group bonded to the α carbon varies among the different amino acids and is called a  **residue** or a  **side chain**, represented in structural formulas by the letter  *R*. A residue is a monomer that results when two or more amino acids combine and remove water molecules. The primary structure of a protein, a peptide chain, is made of amino acid residues. The unique characteristics of the functional groups and  **R group**s allow these components of the amino acids to form hydrogen, ionic, and disulfide bonds, along with polar/nonpolar interactions needed to form secondary, tertiary, and quaternary protein structures. These groups are composed primarily of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur, in the form of hydrocarbons, acids, amides, alcohols, and amines. A few examples illustrating these possibilities are provided in {'Figure_7_4_aminoacids Figure 7.4.aminoacids}.


{image:'Figure_7_4_aminoacids}
        

Amino acids may chemically bond together by reaction of the  **carboxylic acid** group of one molecule with the  **amine group** of another. This reaction forms a  **peptide bond** and a water molecule and is another example of  **dehydration synthesis** ({'Figure_7_4_peptide Figure 7.4.peptide}). Molecules formed by chemically linking relatively modest numbers of  **amino acid**s (approximately 50 or fewer) are called  **peptide**s, and prefixes are often used to specify these numbers:  **dipeptide**s (two amino acids),  **tripeptide**s (three amino acids), and so forth. More generally, the approximate number of amino acids is designated:  **oligopeptide** **s** are formed by joining up to approximately 20 amino acids, whereas  **polypeptide** **s** are synthesized from up to approximately 50 amino acids. When the number of amino acids linked together becomes very large, or when multiple polypeptides are used as building subunits, the macromolecules that result are called  **proteins**. The continuously variable length (the number of monomers) of these  **biopolymers**, along with the variety of possible  **R group**s on each amino acid, allows for a nearly unlimited diversity in the types of proteins that may be formed.


{image:'Figure_7_4_peptide}
        
