index: hide
name: Solutions

We have previously defined solutions as homogeneous mixtures, meaning that the composition of the mixture (and therefore its properties) is uniform throughout its entire volume. Solutions occur frequently in nature and have also been implemented in many forms of manmade technology. We will explore a more thorough treatment of solution properties in the chapter on solutions and colloids, but here we will introduce some of the basic properties of solutions.

The relative amount of a given solution component is known as its  **concentration**. Often, though not always, a solution contains one component with a concentration that is significantly greater than that of all other components. This component is called the  **solvent** and may be viewed as the medium in which the other components are dispersed, or  **dissolved**. Solutions in which water is the solvent are, of course, very common on our planet. A solution in which water is the solvent is called an  **aqueous solution**.

A  **solute** is a component of a solution that is typically present at a much lower concentration than the solvent. Solute concentrations are often described with qualitative terms such as  **dilute** (of relatively low concentration) and  **concentrated** (of relatively high concentration).

Concentrations may be quantitatively assessed using a wide variety of measurement units, each convenient for particular applications.  **Molarity (M)** is a useful concentration unit for many applications in chemistry. Molarity is defined as the number of moles of solute in exactly 1 liter (1 L) of the solution:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mi>M</mi><mo>=</mo><mspace width="0.2em"/><mfrac><mrow><mtext>mol solute</mtext></mrow><mrow><mtext>L solution</mtext></mrow></mfrac><mspace width="0.2em"/></mrow></math>

When performing calculations stepwise, as in , it is important to refrain from rounding any intermediate calculation results, which can lead to rounding errors in the final result. In , the molar amount of NaCl computed in the first step, 1.325 mol, would be properly rounded to 1.32 mol if it were to be reported; however, although the last digit (5) is not significant, it must be retained as a guard digit in the intermediate calculation. If we had not retained this guard digit, the final calculation for the mass of NaCl would have been 77.1 g, a difference of 0.3 g.

In addition to retaining a guard digit for intermediate calculations, we can also avoid rounding errors by performing computations in a single step (see ). This eliminates intermediate steps so that only the final result is rounded.
