index: hide
name: Use of Whole-Genome Sequences of Model Organisms

The first genome to be completely sequenced was of a bacterial virus, the bacteriophage fx174 (5368 base pairs); this was accomplished by Fred Sanger using shotgun sequencing. Several other organelle and viral genomes were later sequenced. The first organism whose genome was sequenced was the bacterium  *Haemophilus influenzae*; this was accomplished by Craig Venter in the 1980s. Approximately 74 different laboratories collaborated on the sequencing of the genome of the yeast  *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*, which began in 1989 and was completed in 1996, because it was 60 times bigger than any other genome that had been sequenced. By 1997, the genome sequences of two important model organisms were available: the bacterium  *Escherichia coli* K12 and the yeast  *Saccharomyces cerevisiae*. Genomes of other model organisms, such as the mouse  *Mus musculus*, the fruit fly  *Drosophila melanogaster*, the nematode  *Caenorhabditis. elegans*, and humans  *Homo sapiens* are now known. A lot of basic research is performed in model organisms because the information can be applied to genetically similar organisms. A  **model organism** is a species that is studied as a model to understand the biological processes in other species represented by the model organism. Having entire genomes sequenced helps with the research efforts in these model organisms. The process of attaching biological information to gene sequences is called  **genome annotation**. Annotation of gene sequences helps with basic experiments in molecular biology, such as designing PCR primers and RNA targets.
