index: hide
name: Leaves, Sporophylls, and Strobili

A third innovation marks the seedless vascular plants. Accompanying the prominence of the sporophyte and the development of vascular tissue, the appearance of true leaves improved their photosynthetic efficiency. Leaves capture more sunlight with their increased surface area by employing more chloroplasts to trap light energy and convert it to chemical energy, which is then used to fix atmospheric carbon dioxide into carbohydrates. The carbohydrates are exported to the rest of the plant by the conductive cells of phloem tissue.

The existence of two types of leaf morphology— *microphylls* and  *megaphylls*—suggests that leaves evolved independently in several groups of plants. Microphylls ("little leaves") are small and have a simple vascular system. The first  **microphylls** in the fossil record can be dated to 350 million years ago in the late Silurian. A single unbranched  **vein**—a bundle of vascular tissue made of xylem and phloem—runs through the center of the leaf. Microphylls may have originated from the flattening of lateral branches, or from sporangia that lost their reproductive capabilities. Microphylls are seen in club mosses. Microphylls probably preceded the development of  **megaphylls** ("big leaves"), which are larger leaves with a pattern of multiple veins. Megaphylls most likely appeared independently several times during the course of evolution. Their complex networks of veins suggest that several branches may have combined into a flattened organ, with the gaps between the branches being filled with photosynthetic tissue. Megaphylls are seen in ferns and more derived vascular plants. 

In addition to photosynthesis, leaves play another role in the life of the plants. Pine cones, mature fronds of ferns, and flowers are all  **sporophylls**—leaves that were modified structurally to bear sporangia.  **Strobili** are cone-like structures that contain sporangia. They are prominent in conifers, where they are commonly known as pine cones.
