index: hide
name: Ferns and Other Seedless Vascular Plants

By the late Devonian period, plants had evolved vascular tissue, well-defined leaves, and root systems. With these advantages, plants increased in height and size. During the Carboniferous period (360 to 300 MYA), swamp forests of club mosses and horsetails—some specimens reaching heights of more than 30 m (100 ft)—covered most of the land. These forests gave rise to the extensive coal deposits that gave the Carboniferous its name. In seedless vascular plants, the sporophyte became the dominant phase of the life cycle.

Water is still required as a medium of sperm transport during the fertilization of seedless vascular plants, and most favor a moist environment. Modern-day seedless tracheophytes include club mosses, horsetails, ferns, and whisk ferns.

##  Phylum Lycopodiophyta: Club Mosses

The  **club mosses**, or phylum  **Lycopodiophyta**, are the earliest group of seedless vascular plants. They dominated the landscape of the Carboniferous, growing into tall trees and forming large swamp forests. Today’s club mosses are diminutive, evergreen plants consisting of a stem (which may be branched) and microphylls ({'Figure_25_4_1 Figure 25.4.1}). The phylum Lycopodiophyta consists of close to 1,200 species, including the quillworts ( *Isoetales*), the club mosses ( *Lycopodiales*), and spike mosses ( *Selaginellales*), none of which are true mosses or bryophytes.

Lycophytes follow the pattern of alternation of generations seen in the bryophytes, except that the sporophyte is the major stage of the life cycle. Some lycophytes, like the club moss  *Lycopodium*, produce gametophytes that are independent of the sporophyte, developing underground or in other locations where they can form mycorrhizal associations with fungi. In many club mosses, the sporophyte gives rise to sporophylls arranged in strobili, cone-like structures that give the class its name. Sporangia develop within the chamber formed by each sporophyll.

Lycophytes can be  *homosporous* (spores of the same size) or  *heterosporous* (spores of different sizes). The spike moss  *Selaginella* is a heterosporous lycophyte. The same strobilus will contain microsporangia, which produce spores that will develop into the male gametophyte, and megasporangia, which produce spores that will develop into the female gametophyte. Both gametophytes develop within the protective strobilus.


{image:'Figure_25_4_1}
        

## Phylum Monilophyta: Class Equisetopsida (Horsetails)

Horsetails, whisk ferns, and ferns belong to the phylum Monilophyta, with  **horsetails** placed in the class Equisetopsida. The single genus  *Equisetum* is the survivor of a large group of plants, known as Arthrophyta, which produced large trees and entire swamp forests in the Carboniferous. The plants are usually found in damp environments and marshes ({'Figure_25_4_2 Figure 25.4.2}).


{image:'Figure_25_4_2}
        

The stem of a horsetail is characterized by the presence of joints or nodes, hence the name Arthrophyta (arthro- = "joint"; -phyta = "plant"). Leaves and branches come out as whorls from the evenly spaced joints. The needle-shaped leaves do not contribute greatly to photosynthesis, the majority of which takes place in the green stem ({'Figure_25_4_3 Figure 25.4.3}).


{image:'Figure_25_4_3}
        

Silica collected by in the epidermal cells contributes to the stiffness of horsetail plants, but underground stems known as rhizomes anchor the plants to the ground. Modern-day horsetails are homosporous. The spores are attached to elaters—as we have seen, these are coiled threads that spring open in dry weather and casts the spores to a location distant from the parent plants. The spores then germinate to produce small bisexual gametophytes.

## Phylum Monilophyta: Class Psilotopsida (Whisk Ferns)

While most ferns form large leaves and branching roots, the  **whisk ferns**, class Psilotopsida, lack both roots and leaves, probably lost by reduction. Photosynthesis takes place in their green stems, which branch dichotomously. Small yellow knobs form at the tip of a branch or at branch nodes and contain the sporangia ({'Figure_25_4_4 Figure 25.4.4}). Spores develop into gametophytes that are only a few millimeters across, but which produce both male and female gametangia. Whisk ferns were considered early pterophytes. However, recent comparative DNA analysis suggests that this group may have lost both vascular tissue and roots through evolution, and is more closely related to ferns.


{image:'Figure_25_4_4}
        

## Phylum Monilophyta: Class Polypodiopsida (True Ferns)

With their large fronds, the true  **ferns** are perhaps the most readily recognizable seedless vascular plants. They are also considered to be the most advanced seedless vascular plants and display characteristics commonly observed in seed plants. More than 20,000 species of ferns live in environments ranging from the tropics to temperate forests. Although some species survive in dry environments, most ferns are restricted to moist, shaded places. Ferns made their appearance in the fossil record during the Devonian period (420 MYA) and expanded during the Carboniferous (360 to 300 MYA).

The dominant stage of the life cycle of a fern is the sporophyte, which consists of large compound leaves called fronds. Fronds may be either finely divided or broadly lobed. Fronds fulfill a double role; they are photosynthetic organs that also carry reproductive organs. The stem may be buried underground as a rhizome, from which adventitious roots grow to absorb water and nutrients from the soil; or, they may grow above ground as a trunk in tree ferns ({'Figure_25_4_5 Figure 25.4.5}).  **Adventitious** organs are those that grow in unusual places, such as roots growing from the side of a stem.


{image:'Figure_25_4_5}
        

The tip of a developing fern frond is rolled into a crozier, or fiddlehead ({'Figure_25_4_6 Figure 25.4.6}). Fiddleheads unroll as the frond develops.


{image:'Figure_25_4_6}
        

On the underside of each mature fern frond are groups of sporangia called sori ({'Figure_B25_4_9 Figure B25.4.9} **a**). Most ferns are homosporous. Spores are produced by meiosis and are released into the air from the sporangium. Those that land on a suitable substrate germinate and form a heart-shaped gametophyte, or prothallus, which is attached to the ground by thin filamentous rhizoids ({'Figure_B25_4_9 Figure B25.4.9} **b**). Gametophytes produce both antheridia and archegonia. Like the sperm cells of other pterophytes, fern sperm have multiple flagella and must swim to the archegonium, which releases a chemoattractant to guide them. The zygote develops into a fern sporophyte, which emerges from the archegonium of the gametophyte. Maturation of antheridia and archegonia at different times encourages cross-fertilization. The full life cycle of a fern is depicted in .


{image:'Figure_B25_4_9}
        
