index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 3.6.5.1
title: 3.6.5.1 - The Indonesian Throughflow

The transport of water from the Pacific to the Indian Ocean via the Indonesian archipelago is the only low-latitude exchange between oceans, and is significant because it is a fluctuating {Glossary.*Sink sink}/{Glossary.*Source source} for very warm tropical water in the two oceans. The Indonesian Throughflow (ITF) transport has been estimated from hydrographic and XBT transects between Australia and Indonesia, and as a synthesis of these together with satellite {Glossary.*Altimetry altimetry}, wind stress, and other data ({cite.3.'Wunsch_2010}), and from moorings in the principal Indonesian passages. The most comprehensive observations were obtained in 2004–2006 in three passages by the INSTANT mooring array ({cite.3.'Sprintall_et_al_2009}), and show a westward transport of 15.0 (±4) Sv. For the main passage, Makassar Strait, {cite.3.'Susanto_et_al_2012 Susanto et al. (2012)} find 13.3 (±3.6) Sv in the period 2004–2009, with small year-to-year differences. On a longer time scale, the {cite.3.'Wunsch_2010 Wunsch (2010)} estimate for 1992–2007 was 11.5 Sv (±2.4) westward, and thus consistent with INSTANT. {cite.3.'Wainwright_et_al_2008 Wainwright et al. (2008)} analyzed data between Australia and Indonesia beginning in the early 1950s, and found a change in the slope of the {Glossary.*Thermocline thermocline} for data before and after 1976, indicating a decrease in geostrophic transport by 23%, consistent with a weakening of the tradewinds (e.g., {cite.3.'Vecchi_et_al_2006 Vecchi et al. (2006)}, who described a downward {Glossary.*Trend trend} in the Walker circulation since the late 19th century). Other transport estimates based on the IX1 transect show correlation with {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} variability ({cite.3.'Potemra_and_Schneider_2007}) and no significant trend for the period since 1984 having continuous sampling along IX1 ({cite.3.'Sprintall_et_al_2002}). Overall, the limited evidence provides low confidence that a trend in ITF transport has been observed.
