index: hide
name: Interactions of Light

Light waves interact with materials by being reflected, absorbed, or transmitted.  **Reflection** occurs when a wave bounces off of a material. For example, a red piece of cloth may reflect red light to our eyes while absorbing other colors of light.  **Absorbance** occurs when a material captures the energy of a light wave. In the case of glow-in-the-dark plastics, the energy from light can be absorbed and then later re-emitted as another form of phosphorescence. Transmission occurs when a wave travels through a material, like light through glass (the process of transmission is called  **transmittance**). When a material allows a large proportion of light to be transmitted, it may do so because it is thinner, or more transparent (having more  **transparency** and less  **opacity**). {'Figure_2_1_Transparen Figure 2.1.Transparen} illustrates the difference between transparency and opacity.


{image:'Figure_2_1_Transparen}
        

Light waves can also interact with each other by  **interference**, creating complex patterns of motion. Dropping two pebbles into a puddle causes the waves on the puddle’s surface to interact, creating complex interference patterns. Light waves can interact in the same way.

In addition to interfering with each other, light waves can also interact with small objects or openings by bending or scattering. This is called  **diffraction**. Diffraction is larger when the object is smaller relative to the wavelength of the light (the distance between two consecutive peaks of a light wave). Often, when waves diffract in different directions around an obstacle or opening, they will interfere with each other.
