index: hide
name: Electromagnetic Spectrum and Color

Visible light is just one form of  **electromagnetic radiation (EMR)**, a type of energy that is all around us. Other forms of EMR include microwaves, X-rays, and radio waves, among others. The different types of EMR fall on the electromagnetic spectrum, which is defined in terms of wavelength and frequency. The spectrum of  **visible light** occupies a relatively small range of frequencies between infrared and ultraviolet light ({'Figure_2_1_Emspectrum Figure 2.1.Emspectrum}).


{image:'Figure_2_1_Emspectrum}
        

Whereas wavelength represents the distance between adjacent peaks of a light wave, frequency, in a simplified definition, represents the rate of oscillation. Waves with higher frequencies have shorter wavelengths and, therefore, have more oscillations per unit time than lower-frequency waves. Higher-frequency waves also contain more energy than lower-frequency waves. This energy is delivered as elementary particles called photons. Higher-frequency waves deliver more energetic photons than lower-frequency waves.

Photons with different energies interact differently with the retina. In the spectrum of visible light, each  **color** corresponds to a particular frequency and wavelength ({'Figure_2_1_Emspectrum Figure 2.1.Emspectrum}).The lowest frequency of visible light appears as the color red, whereas the highest appears as the color violet. When the retina receives visible light of many different frequencies, we perceive this as white light. However, white light can be separated into its component colors using refraction. If we pass white light through a prism, different colors will be refracted in different directions, creating a rainbow-like spectrum on a screen behind the prism. This separation of colors is called  **dispersion**, and it occurs because, for a given material, the refractive index is different for different frequencies of light.

Certain materials can refract nonvisible forms of EMR and, in effect, transform them into visible light. Certain  **fluorescent** dyes, for instance, absorb ultraviolet or blue light and then use the energy to emit photons of a different color, giving off light rather than simply vibrating. This occurs because the energy absorption causes electrons to jump to higher energy states, after which they then almost immediately fall back down to their ground states, emitting specific amounts of energy as photons. Not all of the energy is emitted in a given photon, so the emitted photons will be of lower energy and, thus, of lower frequency than the absorbed ones. Thus, a dye such as Texas red may be excited by blue light, but emit red light; or a dye such as fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC) may absorb (invisible) high-energy ultraviolet light and emit green light ({'Figure_2_1_Fluorescen Figure 2.1.Fluorescen}). In some materials, the photons may be emitted following a delay after absorption; in this case, the process is called  **phosphorescence**. Glow-in-the-dark plastic works by using phosphorescent material.


{image:'Figure_2_1_Fluorescen}
        
