index: hide
name: Inhibitors of Metabolic Pathways

Some synthetic drugs control bacterial infections by functioning as  **antimetabolites**, competitive inhibitors for bacterial metabolic enzymes (). The  **sulfonamides** ( **sulfa drugs**) are the oldest synthetic antibacterial agents and are structural analogues of  *para*-aminobenzoic acid (PABA), an early intermediate in folic acid synthesis ({'Figure_14_2_SulfTri Figure 14.2.SulfTri}). By inhibiting the enzyme involved in the production of dihydrofolic acid, sulfonamides block bacterial biosynthesis of folic acid and, subsequently, pyrimidines and purines required for nucleic acid synthesis. This mechanism of action provides bacteriostatic inhibition of growth against a wide spectrum of gram-positive and gram-negative pathogens. Because humans obtain folic acid from food instead of synthesizing it intracellularly, sulfonamides are selectively toxic for bacteria. However, allergic reactions to sulfa drugs are common. The  **sulfones** are structurally similar to sulfonamides but are not commonly used today except for the treatment of  **Hansen’s disease** ( **leprosy**).

Trimethoprim is a synthetic antimicrobial compound that serves as an antimetabolite within the same folic acid synthesis pathway as sulfonamides. However,  **trimethoprim** is a structural analogue of dihydrofolic acid and inhibits a later step in the metabolic pathway ({'Figure_14_2_SulfTri Figure 14.2.SulfTri}). Trimethoprim is used in combination with the sulfa drug  **sulfamethoxazole** to treat  **urinary tract infection**s,  **ear infection**s, and  **bronchitis**. As discussed, the combination of trimethoprim and sulfamethoxazole is an example of antibacterial synergy. When used alone, each antimetabolite only decreases production of folic acid to a level where bacteriostatic inhibition of growth occurs. However, when used in combination, inhibition of both steps in the metabolic pathway decreases folic acid synthesis to a level that is lethal to the bacterial cell. Because of the importance of folic acid during fetal development, sulfa drugs and trimethoprim use should be carefully considered during early pregnancy.

The drug  **isoniazid** is an antimetabolite with specific toxicity for mycobacteria and has long been used in combination with  **rifampin** or  **streptomycin** in the treatment of  **tuberculosis**. It is administered as a prodrug, requiring activation through the action of an intracellular bacterial peroxidase enzyme, forming isoniazid-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) and isoniazid-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP), ultimately preventing the synthesis of mycolic acid, which is essential for mycobacterial cell walls. Possible side effects of isoniazid use include  **hepatotoxicity**,  **neurotoxicity**, and hematologic toxicity ( **anemia**).


{image:'Figure_14_2_SulfTri}
        


****

| Metabolic Pathway Target | Mechanism of Action | Drug Class | Specific Drugs | Spectrum of Activity |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Folic acid synthesis | Inhibits the enzyme involved in production of dihydrofolic acid | Sulfonamides | Sulfamethoxazole | Broad spectrum against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria |
| Sulfones | Dapsone |
| Inhibits the enzyme involved in the production of tetrahydrofolic acid | Not applicable | Trimethoprim | Broad spectrum against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria |
| Mycolic acid synthesis | Interferes with the synthesis of mycolic acid | Not applicable | Isoniazid | Narrow spectrum against  *Mycobacterium* spp., including  *M. tuberculosis* |
    
