index: hide
name: Inhibitors of Protein Biosynthesis

The cytoplasmic  **ribosomes** found in animal cells (80S) are structurally distinct from those found in bacterial cells (70S), making protein biosynthesis a good selective target for antibacterial drugs. Several types of protein biosynthesis inhibitors are discussed in this section and are summarized in {'Figure_14_2_ProtSynInh Figure 14.2.ProtSynInh}.

## Protein Synthesis Inhibitors That Bind the 30S Subunit

Aminoglycosides are large, highly polar antibacterial drugs that bind to the 30S subunit of bacterial ribosomes, impairing the proofreading ability of the ribosomal complex. This impairment causes mismatches between codons and anticodons, resulting in the production of proteins with incorrect amino acids and shortened proteins that insert into the cytoplasmic membrane. Disruption of the cytoplasmic membrane by the faulty proteins kills the bacterial cells. The  **aminoglycosides**, which include drugs such as  **streptomycin**,  **gentamicin**,  **neomycin**, and  **kanamycin**, are potent broad-spectrum antibacterials. However, aminoglycosides have been shown to be nephrotoxic (damaging to kidney), neurotoxic (damaging to the nervous system), and ototoxic (damaging to the ear).

Another class of antibacterial compounds that bind to the 30S subunit is the  **tetracyclines**. In contrast to aminoglycosides, these drugs are bacteriostatic and inhibit protein synthesis by blocking the association of tRNAs with the ribosome during translation. Naturally occurring tetracyclines produced by various strains of  **Streptomyces** were first discovered in the 1940s, and several semisynthetic tetracyclines, including  **doxycycline** and  **tigecycline** have also been produced. Although the tetracyclines are broad spectrum in their coverage of bacterial pathogens, side effects that can limit their use include  **phototoxicity**, permanent discoloration of developing teeth, and liver toxicity with high doses or in patients with kidney impairment.

## Protein Synthesis Inhibitors That Bind the 50S Subunit

There are several classes of antibacterial drugs that work through binding to the 50S subunit of bacterial ribosomes. The macrolide antibacterial drugs have a large, complex ring structure and are part of a larger class of naturally produced secondary metabolites called  **polyketides**, complex compounds produced in a stepwise fashion through the repeated addition of two-carbon units by a mechanism similar to that used for fatty acid synthesis. Macrolides are broad-spectrum, bacteriostatic drugs that block elongation of proteins by inhibiting peptide bond formation between specific combinations of amino acids. The first macrolide was  **erythromycin**. It was isolated in 1952 from  **Streptomyces erythreus** and prevents translocation. Semisynthetic macrolides include azithromycin and telithromycin. Compared with erythromycin,  **azithromycin** has a broader spectrum of activity, fewer side effects, and a significantly longer half-life (1.5 hours for erythromycin versus 68 hours for azithromycin) that allows for once-daily dosing and a short 3-day course of therapy (i.e., Zpac formulation) for most infections. Telithromycin is the first semisynthetic within the class known as ketolides. Although telithromycin shows increased potency and activity against macrolide-resistant pathogens, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has limited its use to treatment of community-acquired pneumonia and requires the strongest “black box warning” label for the drug because of serious hepatotoxicity.

The  **lincosamides** include the naturally produced  **lincomycin** and semisynthetic  **clindamycin**. Although structurally distinct from macrolides, lincosamides are similar in their mode of action to the macrolides through binding to the 50S ribosomal subunit and preventing peptide bond formation. Lincosamides are particularly active against streptococcal and staphylococcal infections.

The drug  **chloramphenicol** represents yet another structurally distinct class of antibacterials that also bind to the 50S ribosome, inhibiting peptide bond formation. Chloramphenicol, produced by  **Streptomyces venezuelae**, was discovered in 1947; in 1949, it became the first broad-spectrum antibiotic that was approved by the FDA. Although it is a natural antibiotic, it is also easily synthesized and was the first antibacterial drug synthetically mass produced. As a result of its mass production, broad-spectrum coverage, and ability to penetrate into tissues efficiently, chloramphenicol was historically used to treat a wide range of infections, from  **meningitis** to  **typhoid fever** to  **conjunctivitis**. Unfortunately, serious side effects, such as lethal  **gray baby syndrome**, and suppression of bone marrow production, have limited its clinical role. Chloramphenicol also causes  **anemia** in two different ways. One mechanism involves the targeting of mitochondrial ribosomes within hematopoietic stem cells, causing a reversible, dose-dependent suppression of blood cell production. Once chloramphenicol dosing is discontinued, blood cell production returns to normal. This mechanism highlights the similarity between 70S ribosomes of bacteria and the 70S ribosomes within our mitochondria. The second mechanism of anemia is idiosyncratic (i.e., the mechanism is not understood), and involves an irreversible lethal loss of blood cell production known as  **aplastic anemia**. This mechanism of aplastic anemia is not dose dependent and can develop after therapy has stopped. Because of toxicity concerns, chloramphenicol usage in humans is now rare in the United States and is limited to severe infections unable to be treated by less toxic antibiotics. Because its side effects are much less severe in animals, it is used in veterinary medicine.

The  **oxazolidinones**, including  **linezolid**, are a new broad-spectrum class of synthetic protein synthesis inhibitors that bind to the 50S ribosomal subunit of both gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. However, their mechanism of action seems somewhat different from that of the other 50S subunit-binding protein synthesis inhibitors already discussed. Instead, they seem to interfere with formation of the initiation complex (association of the 50S subunit, 30S subunit, and other factors) for translation, and they prevent  **translocation** of the growing protein from the ribosomal A site to the P site.  summarizes the protein synthesis inhibitors.


{image:'Figure_14_2_ProtSynInh}
        


****

| Molecular Target | Mechanism of Action | Drug Class | Specific Drugs | Bacteriostatic or Bactericidal | Spectrum of Activity |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| 30S subunit | Causes mismatches between codons and anticodons, leading to faulty proteins that insert into and disrupt cytoplasmic membrane | Aminoglycosides | Streptomycin, gentamicin, neomycin, kanamycin | Bactericidal | Broad spectrum |
| Blocks association of tRNAs with ribosome | Tetracyclines | Tetracycline, doxycycline, tigecycline | Bacteriostatic | Broad spectrum |
| 50S subunit | Blocks peptide bond formation between amino acids | Macrolides | Erythromycin, azithromycin, telithromycin | Bacteriostatic | Broad spectrum |
| Lincosamides | Lincomycin, clindamycin | Bacteriostatic | Narrow spectrum |
| Not applicable | Chloramphenicol | Bacteriostatic | Broad spectrum |
| Interferes with the formation of the initiation complex between 50S and 30S subunits and other factors. | Oxazolidinones | Linezolid | Bacteriostatic | Broad spectrum |
    
