index: hide
name: Inhibitors of Nucleic Acid Synthesis

Some antibacterial drugs work by inhibiting nucleic acid synthesis (). For example,  **metronidazole** is a semisynthetic member of the nitroimidazole family that is also an antiprotozoan. It interferes with DNA replication in target cells. The drug  **rifampin** is a semisynthetic member of the  **rifamycin** family and functions by blocking RNA polymerase activity in bacteria. The RNA polymerase enzymes in bacteria are structurally different from those in eukaryotes, providing for  **selective toxicity** against bacterial cells. It is used for the treatment of a variety of infections, but its primary use, often in a cocktail with other antibacterial drugs, is against mycobacteria that cause  **tuberculosis**. Despite the selectivity of its mechanism, rifampin can induce liver enzymes to increase metabolism of other drugs being administered (antagonism), leading to  **hepatotoxicity** (liver toxicity) and negatively influencing the bioavailability and therapeutic effect of the companion drugs.

One member of the quinolone family, a group of synthetic antimicrobials, is  **nalidixic acid**. It was discovered in 1962 as a byproduct during the synthesis of  **chloroquine**, an antimalarial drug. Nalidixic acid selectively inhibits the activity of bacterial DNA gyrase, blocking DNA replication. Chemical modifications to the original quinolone backbone have resulted in the production of  **fluoroquinolones**, like  **ciprofloxacin** and  **levofloxacin**, which also inhibit the activity of DNA gyrase. Ciprofloxacin and levofloxacin are effective against a broad spectrum of gram-positive or gram-negative bacteria, and are among the most commonly prescribed antibiotics used to treat a wide range of infections, including urinary tract infections, respiratory infections, abdominal infections, and skin infections. However, despite their selective toxicity against DNA gyrase, side effects associated with different fluoroquinolones include  **phototoxicity**,  **neurotoxicity**,  **cardiotoxicity**, glucose metabolism dysfunction, and increased risk for tendon rupture.


****

| Mechanisms of Action | Drug Class | Specific Drugs | Spectrum of activity | Clinical Use |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Inhibits bacterial RNA polymerase activity and blocks transcription, killing the cell | Rifamycin | Rifampin | Narrow spectrum with activity against gram-positive and limited numbers of gram-negative bacteria. Also active against  *Mycobacterium tuberculosis.* | Combination therapy for treatment of tuberculosis |
| Inhibits the activity of DNA gyrase and blocks DNA replication, killing the cell | Fluoroquinolones | Ciprofloxacin, ofloxacin, moxifloxacin | Broad spectrum against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria | Wide variety of skin and systemic infections |
    
