index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.7.1.1
title: 10.7.1.1 - Role of External Forcing in the Last Millennium

The {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} concluded that ‘A substantial fraction of the reconstructed NH inter-decadal temperature variability of the seven centuries prior to 1950 is very likely attributable to natural {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing}’. The literature since the AR4, and the availability of more simulations of the last millennium with more complete forcing (see {cite.10.'Schmidt_et_al_2012}), including solar, volcanic and GHG influences, and generally also {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} and orbital forcing) and more sophisticated models, to a much larger extent coupled climate or coupled {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs} ({Chapters.9 Chapter 9}), some of them with interactive {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle}, strengthens these conclusions.

Most reconstructions show correlations with {Glossary.*External_forcing external forcing} that are similar to those found between pre-{Glossary.*Paleoclimate Paleoclimate} Modelling Intercomparison Project Phase 3 (PMIP3) simulations of the last millennium and forcing, suggesting an influence by external forcing (FernándezDonado et al., 2013). From a global scale average of new regional reconstructions, Past Global Changes 2k (PAGES 2k) Consortium (2013) find that periods with strong volcanic and solar forcing combined occurring over the last millennium show significantly cooler conditions than randomly selected periods from the last two millennia. {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution Detection} analyses based on PMIP3 and CMIP5 model simulations for the years from 850 to 1950 and also from 850 to 1850 find that the {Glossary.*Fingerprint fingerprint} of external forcing is detectable in all reconstructions of NH mean temperature considered ({cite.10.'Schurer_et_al_2013}; see {'Figure_10_19 Figure 10.19}), but only in about half the cases considered does detection also occur prior to 1400. The authors find a smaller response to forcing in reconstructions than simulated, but this discrepancy is consistent with {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in forcing or {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} response to it, particularly associated with volcanism. The discrepancy is reduced when using more strongly smoothed data or omitting major volcanic eruptions from the analysis. The level of agreement between fingerprints from multiple models in response to forcing and reconstructions decreases earlier in time, and the forced signal is detected only in about half the cases considered when analysing the period 851 to 1401. This may be partly due to weaker forcing and larger forcing uncertainty early in the millennium and partly due to increased uncertainty in reconstructions. Detection results indicate a contribution by external drivers to the warm conditions in the 11th to 12th century, but cannot explain the warmth around the 10th century in some of the reconstructions ({'Figure_10_19 Figure 10.19}). This detection of a role of external forcing extends work reported in AR4 back into to the 9th century CE.

Detection and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution studies} support results from modelling studies that infer a strong role of external forcing in the cooling of NH temperatures during the Little Ice Age ({Glossary.*Little_Ice_Age LIA}; see {Chapters.5 Chapter 5} and Glossary). Both model simulations ({cite.10.'Jungclaus_et_al_2010}) and results from detection and attribution studies ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007a}; {cite.10.'Schurer_et_al_2013}) suggest that a small drop in GHG concentrations may have contributed to the cool conditions during the 16th and 17th centuries. Note, however, that centennial variations of GHG during the late {Glossary.*Holocene Holocene} are very small relative to their increases since pre-industrial times ({Chapters.6.6_2.6_2_3 Section 6.2.3}). The role of solar forcing is less clear except for decreased agreement if using very large solar forcing (e.g., {cite.10.'Ammann_et_al_2007}; {cite.10.'Feulner_2011}). {cite.10.'Palastanga_et_al_2011 Palastanga et al. (2011)} demonstrate that neither a slowdown of the {Glossary.*Thermohaline_circulation thermohaline circulation} nor a persistently negative {Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation NAO} alone can explain the reconstructed temperature pattern over Europe during the periods 1675–1715 and 1790–1820.

Data assimilation studies support the conclusion that external forcing, together with internal {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability}, provides a consistent explanation of climate change over the last millennium. Goosse et al. (2010, 2012a, 2012b) select, from a very large {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} with an {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMIC}, the individual simulations that are closest to the spatial reconstructions of temperature between 30°N and 60°N by {cite.10.'Mann_et_al_2009 Mann et al. (2009)} accounting for {Glossary.*Reconstruction_of_climate_variable reconstruction} uncertainties. The method also varies the external forcing within uncertainties, determining a combined realization of the forced response and internal variability that best matches the data. Results ({'Figure_10_19 Figure 10.19}) show that simulations reproduce the target reconstruction within the uncertainty range, increasing confidence in the consistency of the reconstruction and the forcing. The results suggest that long-term circulation anomalies may help to explain the hemispheric warmth early in the millennium, although results vary dependent on input parameters of the method.
