index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 1.4.2
title: 1.4.2 - Characterizing Uncertainty

‘Uncertainty’ is a complex and multifaceted property, sometimes originating in a lack of information, and at other times from quite fundamental disagreements about what is known or even knowable ({cite.1.'Moss_and_Schneider_2000}). Furthermore, scientists often disagree about the best or most appropriate way to characterize these {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}: some can be quantified easily while others cannot. Moreover, appropriate characterization is dependent on the intended use of the information and the particular needs of that user community.

Scientific uncertainty can be partitioned in various ways, in which the details of the partitioning usually depend on the context. For instance, the process and classifications used for evaluating observational uncertainty in climate science is not the same as that employed to evaluate projections of future change. Uncertainty in measured quantities can arise from a range of sources, such as statistical variation, variability, inherent randomness, inhomogeneity, approximation, subjective judgement, and linguistic imprecision ({cite.1.'Morgan_et_al_1990}), or from calibration methodologies, instrumental bias or instrumental limitations ({cite.1.'JCGM_2008}).

In the modelling studies that underpin {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections of future climate} change, it is common to partition uncertainty into four main categories: scenario uncertainty, due to uncertainty of future {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} and other {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} agents; ‘model uncertainty’ associated with {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}; {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} and initial condition uncertainty; and forcing and boundary condition uncertainty for the assessment of historical and {Glossary.*Paleoclimate paleoclimate} simulations (e.g., {cite.1.'Collins_and_Allen_2002}; {cite.1.'Yip_et_al_2011}).

In the WGI contribution to the AR5, uncertainty is quantified using 90% uncertainty intervals unless otherwise stated. The 90% uncertainty interval, reported in square brackets, is expected to have a 90% {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} of covering the value that is being estimated. The value that is being estimated has a 5% likelihood of exceeding the upper endpoint of the uncertainty interval, and the value has a 5% likelihood of being less than that the lower endpoint of the uncertainty interval. A best estimate of that value is also given where available. Uncertainty intervals are not necessarily symmetric about the corresponding best estimate.

In a subject as complex and diverse as climate change, the information available as well as the way it is expressed, and often the interpretation of that material, varies considerably with the scientific context. In some cases, two studies examining similar material may take different approaches even to the quantification of uncertainty. The interpretation of similar numerical ranges for similar variables can differ from study to study. Readers are advised to pay close attention to the caveats and conditions that surround the results presented in peer-reviewed studies, as well as those presented in this assessment. To help readers in this complex and subtle task, the IPCC draws on specific, calibrated language scales to express uncertainty ({cite.1.'Mastrandrea_et_al_2010}), as well as specific procedures for the expression of uncertainty (see {'Table_1_2 Table 1.2}). The aim of these structures is to provide tools through which chapter teams might consistently express uncertainty in key results.

{table:'Table_1_2}
