index: hide
name: Flowers

Flowers are modified leaves or sporophylls organized around a central stalk. Although they vary greatly in appearance, all flowers contain the same structures: sepals, petals, pistils, and stamens. A whorl of  **sepals** (the  **calyx**) is located at the base of the peduncle, or stem, and encloses the floral bud before it opens. Sepals are usually photosynthetic organs, although there are some exceptions. For example, the corolla in lilies and tulips consists of three sepals and three petals that look virtually identical—this led botanists to coin the word tepal.  **Petals** (collectively the  **corolla**) are located inside the whorl of sepals and usually display vivid colors to attract pollinators. Flowers pollinated by wind are usually small and dull. The sexual organs are located at the center of the flower.

As illustrated in {'Figure_14_4_2 Figure 14.4.2}, the stigma, style, and ovary constitute the female organ, the  **carpel** or  **pistil**, which is also referred to as the  **gynoecium**. A gynoecium may contain one or more carpels within a single flower. The megaspores and the female gametophytes are produced and protected by the thick tissues of the carpel. A long, thin structure called a  **style** leads from the sticky  **stigma**, where pollen is deposited, to the  **ovary** enclosed in the carpel. The ovary houses one or more ovules that will each develop into a seed upon fertilization. The male reproductive organs, the androecium or  **stamens**, surround the central carpel. Stamens are composed of a thin stalk called a  **filament** and a sac-like structure, the  **anther**, in which microspores are produced by meiosis and develop into pollen grains. The filament supports the anther.


{image:'Figure_14_4_2}
        
