index: hide
name: Diversity of Angiosperms

Angiosperms are classified in a single division, the  **Anthophyta**. Modern angiosperms appear to be a monophyletic group, which means that they originate from a single ancestor. Flowering plants are divided into two major groups, according to the structure of the cotyledons, the pollen grains, and other features:  **monocots**, which include grasses and lilies, and  **eudicots** or  **dicots**, a polyphyletic group.  **Basal angiosperms** are a group of plants that are believed to have branched off before the separation into monocots and eudicots because they exhibit traits from both groups. They are categorized separately in many classification schemes, and correspond to a grouping known as the Magnoliidae. The Magnoliidae group is comprised of magnolia trees, laurels, water lilies, and the pepper family.

## Basal Angiosperms

The Magnoliidae are represented by the magnolias: tall trees that bear large, fragrant flowers with many parts, and are considered archaic ({'Figure_14_4_6abcd Figure 14.4.6abcd} **d**). Laurel trees produce fragrant leaves and small inconspicuous flowers. The Laurales are small trees and shrubs that grow mostly in warmer climates. Familiar plants in this group include the bay laurel, cinnamon, spice bush ({'Figure_14_4_6abcd Figure 14.4.6abcd} **a**), and the avocado tree. The Nymphaeales are comprised of the water lilies, lotus ({'Figure_14_4_6abcd Figure 14.4.6abcd} **c**), and similar plants. All species of the Nymphaeales thrive in freshwater biomes, and have leaves that float on the water surface or grow underwater. Water lilies are particularly prized by gardeners, and have graced ponds and pools since antiquity. The Piperales are a group of herbs, shrubs, and small trees that grow in tropical climates. They have small flowers without petals that are tightly arranged in long spikes. Many species are the source of prized fragrances or spices; for example, the berries of  *Piper nigrum* ({'Figure_14_4_6abcd Figure 14.4.6abcd} **b**) are the familiar black pepper that is used to flavor many dishes.


{image:'Figure_14_4_6abcd}
        

## Monocots

Plants in the monocot group have a single cotyledon in the seedling, and also share other anatomical features. Veins run parallel to the length of the leaves, and flower parts are arranged in a three- or six-fold symmetry. The pollen from the first angiosperms was monosulcate (containing a single furrow or pore through the outer layer). This feature is still seen in the modern monocots. True woody tissue is rarely found in monocots, and the vascular tissue of the stem is not arranged in any particular pattern. The root system is mostly adventitious (unusually positioned) with no major taproot. The monocots include familiar plants such as the true lilies (not to be confused with the water lilies), orchids, grasses, and palms. Many important crops, such as rice and other cereals ({'Figure_14_4_7abcd Figure 14.4.7abcd} **a**), corn, sugar cane, and tropical fruit, including bananas and pineapple, belong to the monocots.


{image:'Figure_14_4_7abcd}
        

## Eudicots

Eudicots, or true dicots, are characterized by the presence of two cotyledons. Veins form a network in leaves. Flower parts come in four, five, or many whorls. Vascular tissue forms a ring in the stem. (In monocots, vascular tissue is scattered in the stem.) Eudicots can be  **herbaceous** (like dandelions or violets), or produce woody tissues. Most eudicots produce pollen that is trisulcate or triporate, with three furrows or pores. The root system is usually anchored by one main root developed from the embryonic radicle. Eudicots comprise two-thirds of all flowering plants. Many species seem to exhibit characteristics that belong to either group; therefore, the classification of a plant as a monocot or a eudicot is not always clearly evident ().


****

| Characteristic | Monocot | Eudicot |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Cotyledon | One | Two |
| Veins in leaves | Parallel | Network ( branched) |
| Vascular tissue | Scattered | Arranged in ring pattern |
| Roots | Network of adventitious roots | Tap root with many lateral roots |
| Pollen | Monosulcate | Trisulcate |
| Flower parts | Three or multiple of three | Four, five, multiple of four or five and whorls |
    
