index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.2.3.2
title: 4.2.3.2 - Antarctic Sea Ice Thickness and Volume

Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, some advances have been made in determining the thickness of Antarctic {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}, particularly in the use of ship-based observations and satellite {Glossary.*Altimetry altimetry}. However, there is still no information on large-scale Antarctic ice thickness change. {cite.4.'Worby_et_al_2008 Worby et al. (2008)} compiled 25 years of ship-based data from 83 Antarctic voyages on which routine observations of sea ice and snow properties were made. Their compilation included a gridded data set that reflects the regional differences in sea ice thickness. A subset of these ship observations, and ice charts, was used by {cite.4.'DeLiberty_et_al_2011 DeLiberty et al. (2011)} to estimate the annual cycle of sea ice thickness and volume in the Ross Sea, and to investigate the relationship between ice thickness and extent. They found that maximum sea ice volume was reached later than maximum extent. While ice is advected to the northern edge and melts, the interior of the sea ice zone is supplied with ice from higher latitudes and continues to thicken by thermodynamic growth and deformation. Satellite retrievals of sea ice freeboard and thickness in the Antarctic ({cite.4.'Mahoney_et_al_2007}; {cite.4.'Zwally_et_al_2008}; {cite.4.'Xie_et_al_2011}) are under development but progress is limited by knowledge of snow thickness and the paucity of suitable validation data sets. A recent analysis of the ICESat record by {cite.4.'Kurtz_and_Markus_2012 Kurtz and Markus (2012)}, assuming zero ice freeboard, found negligible trends in ice thickness over the 5-year record.
