index: hide
name: Prokaryotes, the First Inhabitants of Earth

When and where did cellular life begin? What were the conditions on Earth when life began? We now know that prokaryotes were likely the first forms of cellular life on Earth, and they existed for billions of years before plants and animals appeared. The Earth and its moon are dated at about 4.54 billion years in age. This estimate is based on evidence from radiometric dating of meteorite material together with other substrate material from Earth and the moon. Early Earth had a very different atmosphere (contained less molecular oxygen) than it does today and was subjected to strong solar radiation; thus, the first organisms probably would have flourished where they were more protected, such as in the deep ocean or far beneath the surface of the Earth. Strong volcanic activity was common on Earth at this time, so it is likely that these first organisms—the first prokaryotes—were adapted to very high temperatures. Because early Earth was prone to geological upheaval and volcanic eruption, and was subject to bombardment by mutagenic radiation from the sun, the first organisms were prokaryotes that must have withstood these harsh conditions.

## Microbial Mats

 *Microbial mats* or large biofilms may represent the earliest forms of prokaryotic life on Earth; there is fossil evidence of their presence starting about 3.5 billion years ago. It is remarkable that cellular life appeared on Earth only a billion years after the Earth itself formed, suggesting that pre-cellular “life” that could replicate itself had evolved much earlier. A  **microbial mat** is a multi-layered sheet of prokaryotes ({'Figure_22_1_1 Figure 22.1.1}) that includes mostly bacteria, but also archaeans. Microbial mats are only a few centimeters thick, and they typically grow where different types of materials interface, mostly on moist surfaces. The various types of prokaryotes that comprise them carry out different metabolic pathways, and that is the reason for their various colors. Prokaryotes in a microbial mat are held together by a glue-like sticky substance that they secrete called  *extracellular matrix*.

The first microbial mats likely obtained their energy from chemicals found near hydrothermal vents. A  **hydrothermal vent** is a breakage or fissure in the Earth’s surface that releases geothermally heated water. With the evolution of photosynthesis about three billion years ago, some prokaryotes in microbial mats came to use a more widely available energy source—sunlight—whereas others were still dependent on chemicals from hydrothermal vents for energy and food.


{image:'Figure_22_1_1}
        

## Stromatolites

Fossilized microbial mats represent the earliest record of life on Earth. A  **stromatolite** is a sedimentary structure formed when minerals are precipitated out of water by prokaryotes in a microbial mat ({'Figure_22_1_2ab Figure 22.1.2ab}). Stromatolites form layered rocks made of carbonate or silicate. Although most stromatolites are artifacts from the past, there are places on Earth where stromatolites are still forming. For example, growing stromatolites have been found in the Anza-Borrego Desert State Park in San Diego County, California.


{image:'Figure_22_1_2ab}
        

## The Ancient Atmosphere

Evidence indicates that during the first two billion years of Earth’s existence, the atmosphere was  **anoxic**, meaning that there was no molecular oxygen. Therefore, only those organisms that can grow without oxygen— *anaerobic organisms*—were able to live. Autotrophic organisms that convert solar energy into chemical energy are called  **phototrophs**, and they appeared within one billion years of the formation of Earth. Then,  **cyanobacteria**, also known as “blue-green algae,” evolved from these simple phototrophs at least one billion years later. It was the ancestral cyanobacteria ({'Figure_22_1_3 Figure 22.1.3}) that began the “oxygenation” of the atmosphere: Increased atmospheric oxygen allowed the evolution of more efficient O<sub>2</sub>-utilizing catabolic pathways. It also opened up the land to increased colonization, because some O<sub>2</sub> is converted into O<sub>3</sub> (ozone) and ozone effectively absorbs the ultraviolet light that could have otherwise caused lethal mutations in DNA. The current evidence suggests that the increase in O<sub>2</sub> concentrations allowed the evolution of other life forms.


{image:'Figure_22_1_3}
        
