index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.1.2
title: 12.4.1.2 - Uncertainties in Global Quantities

Uncertainties in global mean quantities arise from variations in internal natural variability, model response and forcing pathways. {'Table_12_2 Table 12.2} gives two measures of uncertainty in the CMIP5 model {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}, the standard deviation and the 5 to 95% range across the {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}’s distribution. Because CMIP5 was not designed to explore fully the uncertainty range in projections (see {Chapters.12.12_2 Section 12.2}), neither its standard deviation nor its range can be interpreted directly as an uncertainty statement about the corresponding real quantities, and other techniques and arguments to assess uncertainty in future projections must be considered. {'Figure_12_8 Figure 12.8} summarizes the uncertainty ranges in global mean temperature changes at the end of the 21st century under the various {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} quantified by various methods. Individual CMIP5 models are shown by red crosses. Red bars indicate mean and 5 to 95% {Glossary.*Percentiles percentiles} based on assuming a normal distribution for the CMIP5 sample (i.e., ±1.64 standard deviations). Estimates from the simple climate {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} Model for the Assessment of Greenhouse Gas-Induced Climate Change (MAGICC; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011a}; {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011b}) calibrated to C4MIP ({cite.12.'Friedlingstein_et_al_2006}) carbon cycle models, assuming a {Glossary.*Probability_Density_Function PDF} for {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} that corresponds to the assessment of IPCC {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}, {Box_10_2 Box 10.2}), are given as yellow bars ({cite.12.'Rogelj_et_al_2012}). Note that not all models have simulated all scenarios. To test the effect of undersampling, and to generate a consistent set of {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} across scenarios, a step response method that estimates the total warming as sum of responses to small forcing steps ({cite.12.'Good_et_al_2011a}) is used to emulate 23 CMIP5 models under the different scenarios (those 23 models that supplied the necessary simulations to compute the emulators, i.e., {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} step change experiments). This provides means and ranges (5 to 95%) that are comparable across scenarios (blue). See also {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_9 Section 12.4.9} for a discussion focussed on the differences between CMIP3 and CMIP5 projections of global average temperature changes.

{image:'Figure_12_8}

For the CO2 concentration-driven simulations ({'Figure_12_8 Figure 12.8}a), the dominant driver of uncertainty in projections of global temperature for the higher {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} beyond 2050 is the transient {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} (TCR), for {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6}, which is closer to equilibrium by the end of the century, it is both the TCR and the {Glossary.*Equilibrium_climate_sensitivity equilibrium climate sensitivity} (ECS). In a transient situation, the ratio of temperature to forcing is approximately constant and scenario independent ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}, Appendix 10.A.1; {cite.12.'Gregory_and_Forster_2008}; {cite.12.'Knutti_et_al_2008b}; {cite.12.'Good_et_al_2013}). Therefore, the uncertainty in TCR maps directly into the uncertainty in global temperature projections for the RCPs other than RCP2.6. The assessed likely range of TCR based on various lines of evidence (see {Box_12_2 Box 12.2}) is similar to the 5 to 95% percentile range of TCR in CMIP5. In addition, the assessed likely range of ECS is also consistent with the CMIP5 range (see {Box_12_2 Box 12.2}). There is little evidence that the CMIP5 models are significantly overor underestimating the RF. The RF uncertainty is small compared to response uncertainty (see {'Figure_12_4 Figure 12.4}), and is considered by treating the 5 to 95% as a likely rather than very likely range. {cite.12.'Kuhlbrodt_and_Gregory_2012 Kuhlbrodt and Gregory (2012)} suggest that models might be overestimating ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake}, as previously suggested by {cite.12.'Forest_et_al_2006 Forest et al. (2006)}, but observationally constrained estimates of TCR are unaffected by that. The {Glossary.*Ocean_heat_uptake_efficiency ocean heat uptake efficiency} does not contribute much to the spread of TCR ({cite.12.'Knutti_and_Tomassini_2008}; {cite.12.'Kuhlbrodt_and_Gregory_2012}).

Therefore, for global mean temperature projections only, the 5 to 95% range (estimated as 1.64 times the sample standard deviation) of the CMIP5 projections can also be interpreted as a likely range for future temperature change between about 2050 and 2100. Confidence in this assessment is high for the end of the century because the warming then is dominated by CO2 and the TCR. Confidence is only medium for mid-century when the contributions of RF and initial conditions to the total temperature response uncertainty are larger. The likely ranges are an expert assessment, taking into account many lines of evidence, in much the same way as in AR4 (Figure SPM.5), and are not probabilistic. The likely ranges for 2046–2065 do not take into account the possible influence of factors that lead to near-term (2016–2035) projections of global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} (GMST) that are somewhat cooler than the 5 to 95% model ranges (see {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6 Section 11.3.6}), because the influence of these factors on longer term projections cannot be quantified. A few recent studies indicate that some of the models with the strongest transient climate response might overestimate the near term warming ({cite.12.'Otto_et_al_2013}; {cite.12.'Stott_et_al_2013}) (see Sections {Chapters.10.10_8.10_8_1 10.8.1} {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_2.11_3_2_1.11_3_2_1_1 11.3.2.1.1}), but there is little evidence of whether and how much that affects the long-term warming response. One perturbed physics ensemble combined with observations indicates warming that exceeds the AR4 at the top end but used a relatively short time period of warming (50 years) to constrain the models’ projections ({cite.12.'Rowlands_et_al_2012}) (see Sections {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_2.11_3_2_1.11_3_2_1_1 11.3.2.1.1} and {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_6.11_3_6_3 11.3.6.3}). GMSTs for 2081–2100 (relative to 1986–2005) for the CO2 concentration driven RCPs is therefore assessed to likely fall in the range 0.3°C to 1.7°C (RCP2.6), 1.1°C to 2.6°C (RCP4.5), 1.4°C to 3.1°C (RCP6.0), and 2.6°C to 4.8°C ({Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}) estimated from CMIP5. Beyond 2100, the number of CMIP5 simulations is insufficient to estimate a likely range. Uncertainties before 2050 are assessed in {Chapters.11.11_3.11_3_2.11_3_2_1.11_3_2_1_1 Section 11.3.2.1.1}. The assessed likely range is very similar to the range estimated by the pulse response model, suggesting that the different sample of models for the different RCPs are not strongly affecting the result, and providing further support that this pulse response technique can be used to emulate temperature and ocean heat uptake in {Chapters.13 Chapter 13} and {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_9 Section 12.4.9}. The results are consistent with the probabilistic results from MAGICC, which for the lower RCPs have a slightly narrower range due to the lack of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} in the simple model, and the fact that non-CO2 {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} are treated more homogeneously than in CMIP5 ({cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2011a}, 2011b). This is particularly pronounced for RCP2.6 where the CMIP5 range is substantially larger, partly due to the larger fraction of non-CO2 forcings in that scenario.

The uncertainty estimate in AR4 for the {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} was –40% to +60% around the CMIP3 means (shown here in grey for comparison). That range was asymmetric and wider for the higher scenarios because it included the uncertainty in carbon cycle climate feedbacks. The SRES scenarios are based on the assumption of prescribed {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, which then translates to uncertainties in concentrations that propagate through to uncertainties in the temperature response. The RCP scenarios assume prescribed concentrations. For scenarios that stabilize (RCP2.6) that approach of constant fractional uncertainty underestimates the uncertainty and is no longer applicable, mainly because internal variability has a larger relative contribution to the total uncertainty ({cite.12.'Good_et_al_2013}; Knutti and Sedláček, 2013). For the RCPs, the carbon cycle climate {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} uncertainty is not included because the simulations are driven by concentrations. Furthermore, there is no clear evidence that distribution of CMIP5 global temperature changes deviates from a normal distribution. For most other variables the shape of the distribution is unclear, and standard deviations are simply used as an indication of {Glossary.*Model_spread model spread}, not representing a formal uncertainty assessment.

Simulations with prescribed CO2 emissions rather than concentrations are only available for RCP8.5 ({'Figure_12_8 Figure 12.8}b) and from MAGICC. The projected temperature change in 2100 is slightly higher and the uncertainty range is wider as a result of uncertainties in the carbon cycle climate feedbacks. The CMIP5 range is consistent with the uncertainty range given in AR4 for SRES A2 in 2100. Further details about emission versus concentration driven simulations are given in {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_8 Section 12.4.8}.

In summary, the projected changes in global temperature for 2100 in the RCP scenarios are very consistent with those obtained by CMIP3 for SRES in IPCC AR4 (see {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_9 Section 12.4.9}) when taking into account the differences in scenarios. The likely uncertainty ranges provided here are similar for {Glossary.*RCP4_5_and_RCP6_0 RCP4.5 and RCP6.0} but narrower for RCP8.5 compared to AR4. There was no scenario as low as RCP2.6 in AR4. The uncertainties in global temperature projections have not decreased significantly in CMIP5 (Knutti and Sedláček, 2013), but the assessed ranges cannot be compared between AR4 and AR5. The main reason is that uncertainties in carbon cycle feedbacks are not considered in the concentration driven RCPs. In contrast, the likely range in AR4 included those. The assessed likely ranges are therefore narrower for the high RCPs. The differences in the projected warming are largely attributable to the difference in scenarios (Knutti and Sedláček, 2013), and the change in the future and reference period, rather than to developments in modelling since AR4. A detailed comparison between the SRES and RCP scenarios and the CMIP3 and CMIP5 models is given in {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_9 Section 12.4.9}.
