index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 14.6.3
title: 14.6.3 - Assessment Summary

The influence of past and future climate change on tropical cyclones is likely to vary by {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}, but the specific characteristics of the changes are not yet well understood, and the substantial influence of {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} and other known {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate modes} on global and regional tropical cyclone activity emphasizes the need for more reliable assessments of future changes in the characteristics of these modes. Recent advances in understanding and phenomenological evidence for shorter-term effects on tropical cyclones from {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing are providing increasingly greater confidence that {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} forcing has had a measurable effect on tropical cyclone activity in certain regions. Shorter term increases such as those observed in the Atlantic over the past 30 to 40 years appear to be robust and have been hypothesized to be related, in part, to regional {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} by {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} and aerosols, but the more steady century-scale trends that may be expected from {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} forcing alone are much more difficult to assess given the data {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in the available tropical cyclone records.

Although {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} under 21st century greenhouse warming indicate that it is likely that the global frequency of tropical cyclones will either decrease or remain essentially unchanged, concurrent with a likely increase in both global mean tropical cyclone maximum wind speed and rainfall rates, there is low confidence in region-specific projections of frequency and intensity. Still, based on high-{Glossary.*Resolution resolution} modelling studies, the frequency of the most intense storms, which are associated with particularly extensive physical effects, will more likely than not increase substantially in some basins under projected 21st century warming and there is medium confidence that tropical cyclone rainfall rates will increase in every affected region.

The global number of ETCs is unlikely to decrease by more than a few percent due to anthropogenic change. A small poleward shift is likely in the SH storm track, but the magnitude is model dependent. There is only medium confidence in projections of storm track shifts in the Northern Hemisphere. Nevertheless, model results suggests that it is more likely than not that the N. Pacific storm track will shift poleward, and that it is unlikely that the N. Atlantic storm track will respond with a simple poleward shift. There is low confidence in the magnitude of regional storm track changes, and the impact of such changes on regional surface climate.
