index: hide
name: DNA Structure

 **Watson and Crick** proposed that  **DNA** is made up of two strands that are twisted around each other to form a right-handed helix. The two DNA strands are  **antiparallel**, such that the 3ʹ end of one strand faces the 5ʹ end of the other ({'Figure_10_2_DoubHelix Figure 10.2.DoubHelix}). The 3ʹ end of each strand has a free hydroxyl group, while the 5ʹ end of each strand has a free phosphate group. The sugar and phosphate of the polymerized nucleotides form the backbone of the structure, whereas the nitrogenous bases are stacked inside. These nitrogenous bases on the interior of the molecule interact with each other, base pairing.

Analysis of the diffraction patterns of DNA has determined that there are approximately 10 bases per turn in DNA. The asymmetrical spacing of the sugar-phosphate backbones generates major grooves (where the backbone is far apart) and minor grooves (where the backbone is close together) ({'Figure_10_2_DoubHelix Figure 10.2.DoubHelix}). These grooves are locations where proteins can bind to DNA. The binding of these proteins can alter the structure of DNA, regulate  **replication**, or regulate  **transcription** of DNA into RNA.


{image:'Figure_10_2_DoubHelix}
        

Base pairing takes place between a purine and pyrimidine. In DNA, adenine (A) and thymine (T) are  **complementary base pairs**, and cytosine (C) and guanine (G) are also complementary base pairs, explaining  **Chargaff’s rules** ({'Figure_10_2_BasePairs Figure 10.2.BasePairs}). The base pairs are stabilized by hydrogen bonds; adenine and thymine form two hydrogen bonds between them, whereas cytosine and guanine form three hydrogen bonds between them.


{image:'Figure_10_2_BasePairs}
        

In the laboratory, exposing the two DNA strands of the double helix to high temperatures or to certain chemicals can break the hydrogen bonds between complementary bases, thus separating the strands into two separate single strands of DNA (single-stranded DNA [ **ssDNA**]). This process is called DNA  **denaturation** and is analogous to protein denaturation, as described in <link:>. The ssDNA strands can also be put back together as double-stranded DNA ( **dsDNA**), through reannealing or renaturing by cooling or removing the chemical denaturants, allowing these hydrogen bonds to reform. The ability to artificially manipulate DNA in this way is the basis for several important techniques in biotechnology ({'Figure_10_2_Denatured Figure 10.2.Denatured}). Because of the additional hydrogen bonding between the C = G base pair, DNA with a high GC content is more difficult to denature than DNA with a lower GC content.


{image:'Figure_10_2_Denatured}
        

## DNA Function

DNA stores the information needed to build and control the cell. The transmission of this information from mother to daughter cells is called  **vertical gene transfer** and it occurs through the process of DNA replication. DNA is replicated when a cell makes a duplicate copy of its DNA, then the cell divides, resulting in the correct distribution of one DNA copy to each resulting cell. DNA can also be enzymatically degraded and used as a source of nucleosides and nucleotides for the cell. Unlike other macromolecules, DNA does not serve a structural role in cells.
