index: hide
name: DNA Nucleotides

The building blocks of nucleic acids are nucleotides. Nucleotides that compose DNA are called  **deoxyribonucleotides**. The three components of a deoxyribonucleotide are a five-carbon sugar called  **deoxyribose**, a phosphate group, and a  **nitrogenous base**, a nitrogen-containing ring structure that is responsible for  **complementary base pairing** between nucleic acid strands ({'Figure_10_2_Nucleotide Figure 10.2.Nucleotide}). The carbon atoms of the five-carbon deoxyribose are numbered 1ʹ, 2ʹ, 3ʹ, 4ʹ, and 5ʹ (1ʹ is read as “one prime”). A  **nucleoside** comprises the five-carbon sugar and nitrogenous base.


{image:'Figure_10_2_Nucleotide}
        

The deoxyribonucleotide is named according to the  **nitrogenous bases** ({'Figure_10_2_Bases Figure 10.2.Bases}). The nitrogenous bases  **adenine** (A) and  **guanine** (G) are the  **purines**; they have a double-ring structure with a six-carbon ring fused to a five-carbon ring. The  **pyrimidines**,  **cytosine** (C) and  **thymine** (T), are smaller nitrogenous bases that have only a six-carbon ring structure.


{image:'Figure_10_2_Bases}
        

Individual nucleoside triphosphates combine with each other by covalent bonds known as 5ʹ-3ʹ  **phosphodiester bonds**, or linkages whereby the phosphate group attached to the 5ʹ carbon of the sugar of one nucleotide bonds to the hydroxyl group of the 3ʹ carbon of the sugar of the next nucleotide. Phosphodiester bonding between nucleotides forms the  **sugar-phosphate backbone**, the alternating sugar-phosphate structure composing the framework of a nucleic acid strand ({'Figure_10_2_NAcidStrand Figure 10.2.NAcidStrand}). During the polymerization process, deoxynucleotide triphosphates (dNTP) are used. To construct the sugar-phosphate backbone, the two terminal phosphates are released from the dNTP as a pyrophosphate. The resulting strand of nucleic acid has a free phosphate group at the 5ʹ carbon end and a free hydroxyl group at the 3ʹ carbon end. The two unused phosphate groups from the nucleotide triphosphate are released as pyrophosphate during phosphodiester bond formation. Pyrophosphate is subsequently hydrolyzed, releasing the energy used to drive nucleotide polymerization.


{image:'Figure_10_2_NAcidStrand}
        
