index: hide
name: Discovering the Double Helix

By the early 1950s, considerable evidence had accumulated indicating that DNA was the genetic material of cells, and now the race was on to discover its three-dimensional structure. Around this time, Austrian biochemist Erwin  **Chargaff** (1905–2002) examined the content of  **DNA** in different species and discovered that adenine, thymine, guanine, and cytosine were not found in equal quantities, and that it varied from species to species, but not between individuals of the same species. He found that the amount of adenine was very close to equaling the amount of thymine, and the amount of cytosine was very close to equaling the amount of guanine, or A = T and G = C. These relationships are also known as  **Chargaff’s rules**.

Other scientists were also actively exploring this field during the mid-20th century. In 1952, American scientist Linus  **Pauling** (1901–1994) was the world’s leading structural chemist and odds-on favorite to solve the structure of DNA. Pauling had earlier discovered the structure of protein α helices, using  **X-ray diffraction**, and, based upon X-ray diffraction images of DNA made in his laboratory, he proposed a triple-stranded model of DNA. At the same time, British researchers Rosalind  **Franklin** (1920–1958) and her graduate student R.G.  **Gosling** were also using X-ray diffraction to understand the structure of DNA ({'Figure_10_2_X-rayDiff Figure 10.2.X-rayDiff}). It was Franklin’s scientific expertise that resulted in the production of more well-defined X-ray diffraction images of DNA that would clearly show the overall double-helix structure of DNA.


{image:'Figure_10_2_X-rayDiff}
        

James Watson (1928–), an American scientist, and Francis Crick (1916–2004), a British scientist, were working together in the 1950s to discover DNA’s structure. They used  **Chargaff’s rules** and  **Franklin** and  **Wilkins**’  **X-ray diffraction** images of DNA fibers to piece together the purine-pyrimidine pairing of the double helical DNA molecule ({'Figure_10_2_DNAHelix Figure 10.2.DNAHelix}). In April 1953,  **Watson and Crick** published their model of the DNA  **double helix** in  *Nature*. The same issue additionally included papers by Wilkins and colleagues, as well as by Franklin and  **Gosling**, each describing different aspects of the molecular structure of DNA. In 1962, James Watson, Francis Crick, and Maurice Wilkins were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine. Unfortunately, by then Franklin had died, and Nobel prizes at the time were not awarded posthumously. Work continued, however, on learning about the structure of DNA. In 1973, Alexander  **Rich** (1924–2015) and colleagues were able to analyze DNA crystals to confirm and further elucidate DNA structure.


{image:'Figure_10_2_DNAHelix}
        
