index: hide
name: Key Concepts and Summary

  *  **Nucleic acids** are composed of  **nucleotides**, each of which contains a pentose sugar, a phosphate group, and a  **nitrogenous base**.  **Deoxyribonucleotides** within DNA contain  **deoxyribose** as the pentose sugar.
  * DNA contains the  **pyrimidines cytosine** and  **thymine**, and the  **purines**  **adenine** and  **guanine**.
  *  **Nucleotides** are linked together by phosphodiester bonds between the 5聞 phosphate group of one nucleotide and the 3聞 hydroxyl group of another. A  **nucleic acid strand** has a free phosphate group at the 5聞 end and a free hydroxyl group at the 3聞 end.
  * Chargaff discovered that the amount of  **adenine** is approximately equal to the amount of  **thymine** in DNA, and that the amount of the  **guanine** is approximately equal to  **cytosine**. These relationships were later determined to be due to complementary base pairing.
  * Watson and Crick, building on the work of Chargaff, Franklin and Gosling, and Wilkins, proposed the double helix model and base pairing for DNA structure.
  * DNA is composed of two complementary strands oriented  **antiparallel** to each other with the  **phosphodiester backbones** on the exterior of the molecule. The nitrogenous bases of each strand face each other and complementary bases hydrogen bond to each other, stabilizing the double helix.
  * Heat or chemicals can break the hydrogen bonds between complementary bases, denaturing DNA. Cooling or removing chemicals can lead to renaturation or reannealing of DNA by allowing hydrogen bonds to reform between complementary bases.
  * DNA stores the instructions needed to build and control the cell. This information is transmitted from parent to offspring through  **vertical gene transfer**.
