index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.5.2.1
title: 7.5.2.1 - Radiative Forcing and Effective Radiative Forcing from All Aerosols

Observations can give useful constraints to aspects of the global {Glossary.*Radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_radiation_interactions RFari} but cannot measure it directly ({Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_4 Section 7.3.4}; {cite.7.'Anderson_et_al_2005}; {cite.7.'Kahn_2012}). Remote sensing observations, in situ measurements of fine-mode {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} properties and a better knowledge of bulk aerosol optical properties make the estimate of total RFari more robust than the RF for individual species (see {cite.7.'Forster_et_al_2007}). Estimates of RFari are either taken from global aerosol models directly ({cite.7.'Schulz_et_al_2009}; {cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013}) or based mostly on observations, but using supplemental information from models (e.g., {cite.7.'Myhre_2009}; {cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010}; {cite.7.'Su_et_al_2013}). A number of studies ({cite.7.'Bellouin_et_al_2008}; {cite.7.'Zhao_et_al_2008b}, 2011; {cite.7.'Myhre_2009}) have improved aspects of the satellite-based RFari estimate over those quoted in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}. Of these, only {cite.7.'Myhre_2009 Myhre (2009)} make the necessary adjustments to the observations to account for forcing in cloudy regions and pre-industrial concentrations to estimate a RFari of –0.3 ± 0.2 W m–2.

A second phase of AeroCom model results gives an RFari estimate of –0.35 W m–2, with a model range of about –0.60 to –0.13 W m–2, after their {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} for 1850–2000 have been scaled by {Topics.*Emissions emissions} to represent 1750–2010 changes ({cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013}). {'Figure_7_17 Figure 7.17} shows the zonal mean total RFari for AeroCom phase II models for 1850–2000. Robust features are the maximum negative RF around 10°N to 50°N, at latitudes of highest aerosol concentrations, and a positive RF at higher latitudes due to the higher surface {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} there.

{image:'Figure_7_17}

For observationally based estimates, a variety of factors are important in constraining the {Glossary.*Radiative_effect radiative effect} of aerosols ({cite.7.'McComiskey_et_al_2008}; {cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010}; {cite.7.'Kahn_2012}). Particularly important are the single scattering albedo (especially over land or above clouds) and the AOD (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_4.7_3_4_1 Section 7.3.4.1}). Errors in remotely sensed, retrieved AOD can be 0.05 or larger over land ({cite.7.'Remer_et_al_2005}; {cite.7.'Kahn_et_al_2010}; {cite.7.'Levy_et_al_2010}; {cite.7.'Kahn_2012}). {cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010 Loeb and Su (2010)} found that the total uncertainty in forcing was dominated by the uncertainty in single scattering albedo, using single scattering albedo errors of ± 0.06 over ocean and ± 0.03 over land from {cite.7.'Dubovik_et_al_2000 Dubovik et al. (2000)}, and assuming errors can be added in quadrature. These retrieval {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} could lead to a 0.5 to 1.0 W m–2 uncertainty in RFari ({cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010}). However, model sensitivity studies and reanalyses can provide additional constraints leading to a reduced error estimate. {cite.7.'Ma_et_al_2012b Ma et al. (2012b)} performed a sensitivity study in one model, finding a best estimate of RFari of –0.41 W m–2 with an asymmetrical uncertainty range of –0.61 to –0.08 W m–2, with {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} particle size and mixing state having the largest effect of the parameters investigated. In models, assumptions about surface albedo, background cloud distribution and radiative transfer contribute a relative standard deviation of 39% ({cite.7.'Stier_et_al_2013}). {cite.7.'Bellouin_et_al_2013 Bellouin et al. (2013)} quantified uncertainties in RFari using {Topics.*Reanalysis reanalysis data} that combined MODIS satellite data over oceans with the global coverage of their model. This approach broke down the uncertainty in aerosol properties into a local and a regional error to find a RFari standard deviation of 0.3 W m–2, not accounting for uncertainty in the pre-industrial reference. When cloudy-sky and pre-industrial corrections were applied an RFari best estimate of –0.4 W m–2 was suggested.

The overall forcing uncertainty in RFari consists of the uncertainty in the distribution of aerosol amount, composition and radiative properties ({cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010}; {cite.7.'Myhre_et_al_2013}), the uncertainty in radiative transfer ({cite.7.'Randles_et_al_2013}) and the uncertainty owing to the dependence of the forcing calculation on other uncertain parameters, such as clouds or surface albedos ({cite.7.'Stier_et_al_2013}). To derive a best estimate and range for RFari we combine modelling and observationally based studies. The best estimate is taken as –0.35 W m–2. This is the same as the AeroCom II model estimate, and also the average of the {cite.7.'Myhre_2009 Myhre (2009)} observationally based estimate (–0.3 W m–2) and the {cite.7.'Bellouin_et_al_2013 Bellouin et al. (2013)} reanalysis estimate (–0.4 W m–2). Models probably underestimate the positive RFari from BC and the negative forcing from OA aerosol (see {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_2.7_5_2_2 Section 7.5.2.2}), and currently there is no evidence that one of these opposing biases dominates over the other. The 5 to 95% range of RFari adopted in this assessment employs the {cite.7.'Bellouin_et_al_2013 Bellouin et al. (2013)} uncertainty to account for retrieval error in observational quantities when constrained by global models, giving an uncertainty estimate of ±0.49 W m–2. This is at the low end of the uncertainty analysis of {cite.7.'Loeb_and_Su_2010 Loeb and Su (2010)}. However, our uncertainty is partly based on models, and to account for this aspect, it is combined in quadrature with a ±0.1 W m–2 uncertainty from non-aerosol related parameters following {cite.7.'Stier_et_al_2013 Stier et al. (2013)}. This gives an assessed RFari of –0.35 ± 0.5 W m–2. This is a larger range than that exhibited by the AeroCom II models. It is also a smaller magnitude but slightly larger range than in AR4, with a more positive upper bound. This more positive upper bound can be justified by the sensitivity to BC aerosol ({cite.7.'Ma_et_al_2012b} and {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_2.7_5_2_3 Section 7.5.2.3}). Despite the larger range, there is increased confidence in this assessment due to dedicated modelling sensitivity studies, more robust observationally based estimates and their better agreement with models.

{Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_radiation_interactions ERFari} adds the radiative effects from rapid adjustments onto RFari. Studies have evaluated the rapid adjustments separately as a semi-direct effect (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_4.7_3_4_2 Section 7.3.4.2}) and/or the ERFari has been directly evaluated. Rapid adjustments are caused principally by cloud changes. There is high confidence that the local heating caused by absorbing aerosols can alter clouds. However, there is low confidence in determining the sign and magnitude of the rapid adjustments at the global scale as current models differ in their responses and are known to inadequately represent some of the important relevant cloud processes (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_4 Section 7.3.4}). Existing estimates of ERFari nevertheless rely on such global models. Five {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} were analysed for RFari and ERFari in {cite.7.'Lohmann_et_al_2010 Lohmann et al. (2010)}. Their rapid adjustments ranged from –0.3 to +0.1 W m–2. In a further study, {cite.7.'Takemura_and_Uchida_2011 Takemura and Uchida (2011)} found a {Glossary.*Rapid_adjustment rapid adjustment} of +0.06 W m–2. The sensitivity analysis of {cite.7.'Ghan_et_al_2012 Ghan et al. (2012)} found a –0.1 to +0.1 W m–2 range over model variants, where an improved aging of the mixing state led to small negative rapid adjustment of around –0.1 W m–2. {cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)} assessed scaled RF and {Glossary.*Efficacy efficacy} estimates from seven earlier studies focusing on BC and found a range of rapid adjustments between –0.2 and –0.01 W m–2. There is a potential additional rapid adjustment term from the effect of cloud drop inclusions (see {Chapters.7.7_3.7_3_4.7_3_4_2 Section 7.3.4.2}). Based on {cite.7.'Ghan_et_al_2012 Ghan et al. (2012)} and {cite.7.'Jacobson_2012 Jacobson (2012)}, {cite.7.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)} estimate an additional ERFari term of +0.2 W m–2, with an uncertainty range of –0.1 to +0.9 W m–2; however there is very low confidence in the sign or magnitude of this effect and we do not include it in our assessment. Overall a best estimate for the rapid adjustment is taken to be –0.1 W m–2, with a 5 to 95% uncertainty range of –0.3 to +0.1 W m–2. The best estimate is based on {cite.7.'Ghan_et_al_2012 Ghan et al. (2012)} and the range on {cite.7.'Lohmann_et_al_2010 Lohmann et al. (2010)}. The uncertainties are added in quadrature to the estimate of RFari and rounded to give an overall assessment for ERFari of –0.45 ± 0.5 W m–2.
