index: hide
public: ar5-Appendix-5.A
name: Appendix 5.A
title: Appendix 5.A - Appendix 5.A: Additional Information on Paleoclimate Archives and Models

{table:'Table_5_A_1}

{table:'Table_5_A_2}

{table:'Table_5_A_3}

{table:'Table_5_A_4}

{table:'Table_5_A_5}

5.A.1 Additional Information to {Chapters.5.5_3.5_3_5 Section 5.3.5}

{Chapters.5.5_3.5_3_5 Section 5.3.5} assesses knowledge of changes in hemispheric and global temperature over the last 2 ka from a range of studies, reconstructions and simulations. Tables 5.A.1 and 5.A.6 provide further information about the datasets used in {'Figure_5_7 Figures 5.7}–5.9 and 5.12, and the construction of {'Figure_5_8 Figure 5.8} is described in more detail. All reconstructions assessed in, or published since, {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} were considered, but those that have been superseded by a related study using an expanded {Glossary.*Proxy proxy} dataset and/or updated statistical methods were excluded.

{'Figure_5_8 Figure 5.8} compares simulated and reconstructed NH temperature changes (see caption). Some reconstructions represent a smaller spatial domain than the full NH or a specific season, while annual temperatures for the full NH mean are shown for the simulations. Multi-model means and estimated 90% multi-model ranges are shown by the thick and thin lines, respectively, for two groups of simulations (Table 5.A.1): those forced by stronger (weaker) solar variability in red (blue). Note that the strength of the solar variability is not the only difference between these groups: the {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} and the other {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} are also different between the groups. In {'Figure_5_7 Figure 5.7}, the reconstructions are shown as deviations from their 1881–1980 means, which allows them to be compared with the instrumental record. In {'Figure_5_8 Figure 5.8}a, all timeseries are expressed as anomalies from their 1500–1850 mean (prior to smoothing with a 30-year Gaussian-weighted filter, truncated 7 years from the end of each series to reduce end-effects of the filter) because the comparison of simulations and reconstructions is less sensitive to errors in {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing applied to the models when a pre-industrial reference period is used, and less sensitive to different realisations of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} with a multi-century reference period. The grey shading represents a measure of the overlapping {Glossary.*Reconstruction_of_climate_variable reconstruction} confidence intervals, with scores of 1 and 2 assigned to temperatures within ±1.645 standard deviation (90% confidence range) or ±1 standard deviation, respectively, then summed over all reconstructions and scaled so that the maximum score is dark grey, and minimum score is pale grey. This allows the multi-model ensembles to be compared with the {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} of reconstructed NH temperatures, taking into account the published confidence intervals.

The superposed composites (time segments from selected periods positioned so that the years with peak negative forcing are aligned; top panels of {'Figure_5_8 Figure 5.8}b–d) compare the simulated and reconstructed temperatures (bottom panels) associated with (b) individual volcanic forcing events; (c) multi-decadal changes in volcanic activity; (d) multi-decadal changes in solar irradiance. Only reconstructions capable of resolving (b) interannual or (c, d) interdecadal variations are used. The thick green line in {'Figure_5_8 Figure 5.8}d shows the composite mean of the volcanic forcing, also band-pass filtered, but constructed using the solar composite periods to demonstrate the changes in volcanic forcing that are coincident with solar variability. The composite of individual volcanic events shown in (b) is formed by aligned time segments centred on the 12 years (1442, 1456, 1600, 1641, 1674, 1696, 1816, 1835, 1884, 1903, 1983 and 1992) during 1400–1999 that the {cite.5.'Crowley_and_Unterman_2013 Crowley and Unterman (2013)} volcanic forcing history exceeds 1.0 W m–2 below the 1500–1899 mean volcanic forcing, excluding events within 7 years (before or after) of a stronger event. The composite of multi-decadal changes in volcanic forcing shown in (c) is formed from 80-year periods centred on the five years (1259, 1456, 1599, 1695 and 1814) during 850–1999 when the {cite.5.'Crowley_and_Unterman_2013 Crowley and Unterman (2013)} volcanic forcing, smoothed with a 40-year Gaussian-weighted filter, exceeds 0.2 W m–2 below the 1500–1899 mean volcanic forcing, except that a year is not selected if it is within 39 years of another year that has a larger negative 40-year smoothed volcanic forcing. The composite of the strongest multidecadal changes in the solar forcing shown in (d) is formed from 80-year periods centred on the seven years (1044, 1177, 1451, 1539, 1673, 1801 and 1905) during 850–1999 when the {cite.5.'Ammann_et_al_2007 Ammann et al. (2007)} solar forcing, band-pass filtered to retain variations on time scales between 20 and 160 years, is reduced by at least 0.1 W m–2 over a 40-year period. Reconstructed and simulated temperature timeseries were smoothed with a 40-year Gaussian-weighted filter in (c) or 20to-160-year band-pass filtered in (d), and each composite was shifted to have zero mean during the (b) 5 or (c, d) 40 years preceding the peak negative forcing.

{table:'Table_5_A_6}
