index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-5.1
name: FAQ 5.1
title: FAQ 5.1 - Is the Sun a Major Driver of Recent Changes in Climate?

Total solar irradiance ({Glossary.*Total_solar_irradiance TSI}, {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}) is a measure of the total energy received from the sun at the top of the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}. It varies over a wide range of time scales, from billions of years to just a few days, though variations have been relatively small over the past 140 years. Changes in solar irradiance are an important driver of {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} ({Chapters.1 Chapter 1}; {'Figure_1_1 Figure 1.1}) along with volcanic {Topics.*Emissions emissions} and anthropogenic factors. As such, they help explain the observed change in global {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} during the instrumental period ({FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}; {Chapters.10 Chapter 10}) and over the last millennium. While solar variability may have had a discernible contribution to changes in global {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} in the early 20th century, it cannot explain the observed increase since TSI started to be measured directly by satellites in the late 1970s ({Chapters.8 Chapter 8}, 10).

{image:'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1}

The Sun’s core is a massive nuclear fusion reactor that converts hydrogen into helium. This process produces energy that radiates throughout the solar system as electromagnetic radiation. The amount of energy striking the top of Earth’s {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} varies depending on the generation and emission of electromagnetic energy by the Sun and on the Earth’s orbital path around the Sun.

Satellite-based instruments have directly measured TSI since 1978, and indicate that on average, ~1361 W m–2 reaches the top of the Earth’s atmosphere. Parts of the Earth’s surface and air pollution and clouds in the atmosphere act as a mirror and reflect about 30% of this power back into space. Higher levels of TSI are recorded when the Sun is more active. Irradiance variations follow the roughly 11-year sunspot cycle: during the last cycles, TSI values fluctuated by an average of around 0.1%.

For pre-satellite times, TSI variations have to be estimated from sunspot numbers (back to 1610), or from radioisotopes that are formed in the atmosphere, and archived in polar ice and {Glossary.*Tree_rings tree rings}. Distinct 50to 100-year periods of very low {Glossary.*Solar_activity solar activity}—such as the Maunder Minimum between 1645 and 1715—are commonly referred to as grand solar minima. Most estimates of TSI changes between the Maunder Minimum and the present day are in the order of 0.1%, similar to the amplitude of the 11-year variability.

How can solar variability help explain the observed global surface temperature record back to 1870? To answer this question, it is important to understand that other climate drivers are involved, each producing characteristic patterns of {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} responses. However, it is the combination of them all that causes the observed climate change. Solar variability and volcanic eruptions are natural factors. {Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} (human-produced) factors, on the other hand, include changes in the concentrations of greenhouse gases, and emissions of visible air pollution (aerosols) and other substances from {Topics.*Human_Influence human activities}. ‘Internal variability’ refers to fluctuations within the climate system, for example, due to weather variability or phenomena like the El Niño-{Glossary.*Southern_Oscillation Southern Oscillation}.

The relative contributions of these natural and anthropogenic factors change with time. {FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1} illustrates those contributions based on a very simple calculation, in which the mean global surface temperature variation represents the sum of four components linearly related to solar, volcanic, and {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing}, and to internal variability. Global surface temperature has increased by approximately 0.8°C from 1870 to 2010 ({FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}a). However, this increase has not been uniform: at times, factors that cool the Earth’s surface—volcanic eruptions, reduced solar activity, most anthropogenic {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} emissions—have outweighed those factors that warm it, such as greenhouse gases, and the variability generated within the climate system has caused further fluctuations unrelated to external influences.

The solar contribution to the record of global surface temperature change is dominated by the 11-year {Glossary.*Solar_11_year_cycle solar cycle}, which can explain global temperature fluctuations up to approximately 0.1°C between minima and maxima ({FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}b). A long-term increasing {Glossary.*Trend trend} in solar activity in the early 20th century may have augmented the warming recorded during this interval, together with internal variability, {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} increases and a hiatus in volcanism. However, it cannot explain the observed increase since the late 1970s, and there was even a slight decreasing trend of TSI from 1986 to 2008 (Chapters {Chapters.8} and {Chapters.10}).

Volcanic eruptions contribute to global surface temperature change by episodically injecting aerosols into the atmosphere, which cool the Earth’s surface ({FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}c). Large volcanic eruptions, such as the eruption of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991, can cool the surface by around 0.1°C to 0.3°C for up to three years.

The most important component of internal climate variability is the El Niño Southern Oscillation, which has a major effect on year-to-year variations of tropical and global mean temperature ({FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}d). Relatively high annual temperatures have been encountered during El Niño events, such as in 1997–1998.

The variability of observed global surface temperatures from 1870 to 2010 (Figure 1a) reflects the combined influences of natural (solar, volcanic, internal; {FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}b–d) factors, superimposed on the multi-decadal warming trend from anthropogenic factors ({FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}e).

Prior to 1870, when anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases and aerosols were smaller, changes in solar and volcanic activity and internal variability played a more important role, although the specific contributions of these individual factors to global surface temperatures are less certain. Solar minima lasting several decades have often been associated with cold conditions. However, these periods are often also affected by volcanic eruptions, making it difficult to quantify the solar contribution.

At the regional scale, changes in solar activity have been related to changes in surface climate and atmospheric circulation in the Indo-Pacific, Northern Asia and North Atlantic areas. The mechanisms that amplify the regional effects of the relatively small fluctuations of TSI in the roughly 11-year solar cycle involve dynamical interactions between the upper and the lower atmosphere, or between the ocean sea surface temperature and atmosphere, and have little effect on global mean temperatures (see {Box_10_2 Box 10.2}).

Finally, a decrease in solar activity during the past solar minimum a few years ago ({FAQ_5_1 FAQ 5.1}, {'FAQ_5_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}b) raises the question of its future influence on climate. Despite {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in future solar activity, there is high confidence that the effects of solar activity within the range of grand solar maxima and minima will be much smaller than the changes due to anthropogenic effects.
