index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.5.4
title: 8.3.5.4 - Other Impacts of Land Cover Change on the Earth’s Albedo

Burn scars resulting from agriculture practices, uncontrolled fires or {Glossary.*Deforestation deforestation} ({cite.8.'Bowman_et_al_2009}) have a lower {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} than unperturbed vegetation ({cite.8.'Jin_and_Roy_2005}). On the other hand, at high latitude, burnt areas are more easily covered by snow, which may result in an overall increase of the surface albedo. Surface blackening of natural vegetation due to fire is relatively short lived and typically disappears within one to a few years ({cite.8.'Jin_et_al_2012}). {cite.8.'Myhre_et_al_2005b Myhre et al. (2005b)} estimates a global albedo-related {Glossary.*Radiative_effect radiative effect} due to African fires of 0.015 W m–2.

Over semi-arid areas, the development of agriculture favours the generation of dust. {cite.8.'Mulitza_et_al_2010 Mulitza et al. (2010)} demonstrates a very large increase of dust emission and deposition in the Sahel concomitant with the development of agriculture in this area. This, together with the analysis of dust sources ({cite.8.'Ginoux_et_al_2010}), suggests that a significant fraction of the dust that is transported over the Atlantic has an {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} origin and impacts the Earth albedo. There is no full estimate of the resulting {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF}, however. The dust RF estimate in {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4.8_3_4_2 Section 8.3.4.2} includes both land use contributions and change in wind-driven {Topics.*Emissions emissions}. Both dust and {Glossary.*Biomass biomass} burning {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} may impact the Earth surface albedo as these particles can be deposed on snow, which has a large impact on its absorption, in particular for soot. This is discussed in {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4.8_3_4_4 Section 8.3.4.4}.

Urban areas have an albedo that is 0.01 to 0.02 smaller than adjacent croplands ({cite.8.'Jin_et_al_2005}). There is the potential for a strong increase through white roof coating with the objective of mitigating the heat island effect ({cite.8.'Oleson_et_al_2010}). Although the global scale impact is small, local effects can be very large, as shown by {cite.8.'Campra_et_al_2008 Campra et al. (2008)} that reports a regional (260 km2) 0.09 increase in albedo and –20 W m–2 RF as a consequence of greenhouse horticulture development.
