index: hide
name: The Structure of the Atom

To understand how elements come together, we must first discuss the smallest component or building block of an element, the atom. An  **atom** is the smallest unit of matter that retains all of the chemical properties of an element. For example, one gold atom has all of the properties of gold in that it is a solid metal at room temperature. A gold coin is simply a very large number of gold atoms molded into the shape of a coin and containing small amounts of other elements known as impurities. Gold atoms cannot be broken down into anything smaller while still retaining the properties of gold.

An atom is composed of two regions: the  **nucleus**, which is in the center of the atom and contains protons and neutrons, and the outermost region of the atom which holds its electrons in orbit around the nucleus, as illustrated in . Atoms contain protons, electrons, and neutrons, among other subatomic particles. The only exception is hydrogen (H), which is made of one proton and one electron with no neutrons.


{image:'Figure_2_1_1}
        

Protons and neutrons have approximately the same mass, about 1.67 × 10<sup>-24</sup> grams. Scientists arbitrarily define this amount of mass as one atomic mass unit (amu) or one Dalton, as shown in . Although similar in mass, protons and neutrons differ in their electric charge. A  **proton** is positively charged whereas a  **neutron** is uncharged. Therefore, the number of neutrons in an atom contributes significantly to its mass, but not to its charge.  **Electrons** are much smaller in mass than protons, weighing only 9.11 × 10<sup>-28</sup> grams, or about 1/1800 of an atomic mass unit. Hence, they do not contribute much to an element’s overall atomic mass. Therefore, when considering atomic mass, it is customary to ignore the mass of any electrons and calculate the atom’s mass based on the number of protons and neutrons alone. Although not significant contributors to mass, electrons do contribute greatly to the atom’s charge, as each electron has a negative charge equal to the positive charge of a proton. In uncharged, neutral atoms, the number of electrons orbiting the nucleus is equal to the number of protons inside the nucleus. In these atoms, the positive and negative charges cancel each other out, leading to an atom with no net charge.

Accounting for the sizes of protons, neutrons, and electrons, most of the volume of an atom—greater than 99 percent—is, in fact, empty space. With all this empty space, one might ask why so-called solid objects do not just pass through one another. The reason they do not is that the electrons that surround all atoms are negatively charged and negative charges repel each other.


****

|  | Charge | Mass (amu) | Location |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| Proton | +1 | 1 | nucleus |
| Neutron | 0 | 1 | nucleus |
| Electron | –1 | 0 | orbitals |
    
