index: hide
name: Other Methods of Control

Sterilization protocols require procedures that are not practical, or necessary, in many settings. Various other methods are used in clinical and nonclinical settings to reduce the microbial load on items. Although the terms for these methods are often used interchangeably, there are important distinctions ({'Figure_13_1_ControlTBL Figure 13.1.ControlTBL}).

The process of  **disinfection** inactivates most microbes on the surface of a fomite by using antimicrobial chemicals or heat. Because some microbes remain, the disinfected item is not considered sterile. Ideally,  **disinfectant**s should be fast acting, stable, easy to prepare, inexpensive, and easy to use. An example of a natural disinfectant is  **vinegar**; its acidity kills most microbes. Chemical disinfectants, such as  **chlorine bleach** or products containing chlorine, are used to clean nonliving surfaces such as laboratory benches, clinical surfaces, and bathroom sinks. Typical disinfection does not lead to sterilization because endospores tend to survive even when all vegetative cells have been killed.

Unlike disinfectants,  **antiseptic**s are antimicrobial chemicals safe for use on living skin or tissues. Examples of antiseptics include  **hydrogen peroxide** and  **isopropyl alcohol**. The process of applying an antiseptic is called  **antisepsis**. In addition to the characteristics of a good disinfectant, antiseptics must also be selectively effective against microorganisms and able to penetrate tissue deeply without causing tissue damage.

The type of protocol required to achieve the desired level of cleanliness depends on the particular item to be cleaned. For example, those used clinically are categorized as critical, semicritical, and noncritical. Critical items must be sterile because they will be used inside the body, often penetrating sterile tissues or the bloodstream; examples of  **critical item**s include surgical instruments,  **catheters**, and intravenous fluids. Gastrointestinal  **endoscope**s and various types of equipment for respiratory therapies are examples of  **semicritical item**s; they may contact mucous membranes or nonintact skin but do not penetrate tissues. Semicritical items do not typically need to be sterilized but do require a high level of disinfection. Items that may contact but not penetrate intact skin are  **noncritical item**s; examples are bed linens, furniture, crutches, stethoscopes, and blood pressure cuffs. These articles need to be clean but not highly disinfected.

The act of  **handwashing** is an example of  **degerming**, in which microbial numbers are significantly reduced by gently scrubbing living tissue, most commonly skin, with a mild chemical (e.g., soap) to avoid the transmission of pathogenic microbes. Wiping the skin with an alcohol swab at an injection site is another example of degerming. These degerming methods remove most (but not all) microbes from the skin’s surface.

The term  **sanitization** refers to the cleansing of fomites to remove enough microbes to achieve levels deemed safe for public health. For example, commercial dishwashers used in the food service industry typically use very hot water and air for washing and drying; the high temperatures kill most microbes, sanitizing the dishes. Surfaces in hospital rooms are commonly sanitized using a chemical disinfectant to prevent disease transmission between patients. {'Figure_13_1_ControlTBL Figure 13.1.ControlTBL} summarizes common protocols, definitions, applications, and agents used to control microbial growth.


{image:'Figure_13_1_ControlTBL}
        
