index: hide
name: Cultivation of Viruses

Viruses can be grown  **in vivo** (within a whole living organism, plant, or animal) or  **in vitro** (outside a living organism in cells in an artificial environment, such as a test tube, cell culture flask, or agar plate).  **Bacteriophages** can be grown in the presence of a dense layer of bacteria (also called a  **bacterial lawn**) grown in a 0.7 % soft agar in a Petri dish or flat (horizontal) flask (see {'Figure_6_3_plaques Figure 6.3.plaques}). The agar concentration is decreased from the 1.5% usually used in culturing bacteria. The soft 0.7% agar allows the bacteriophages to easily diffuse through the medium. For lytic bacteriophages, lysing of the bacterial hosts can then be readily observed when a clear zone called a  **plaque** is detected (see {'Figure_6_3_plaques Figure 6.3.plaques}). As the phage kills the bacteria, many plaques are observed among the cloudy bacterial lawn.


{image:'Figure_6_3_plaques}
        

Animal viruses require cells within a host animal or tissue-culture cells derived from an animal. Animal virus cultivation is important for 1) identification and diagnosis of pathogenic viruses in clinical specimens, 2) production of vaccines, and 3) basic research studies. In vivo host sources can be a developing embryo in an  **embryonated bird’s egg** (e.g., chicken, turkey) or a whole animal. For example, most of the  **influenza vaccine** manufactured for annual flu vaccination programs is cultured in hens’ eggs.

The embryo or host animal serves as an incubator for viral replication (see {'Figure_6_3_egg Figure 6.3.egg}). Location within the embryo or host animal is important. Many viruses have a tissue tropism, and must therefore be introduced into a specific site for growth. Within an embryo, target sites include the amniotic cavity, the chorioallantoic membrane, or the yolk sac. Viral infection may damage tissue membranes, producing lesions called pox; disrupt embryonic development; or cause the death of the embryo.


{image:'Figure_6_3_egg}
        

For in vitro studies, various types of cells can be used to support the growth of viruses. A  **primary cell culture** is freshly prepared from animal organs or tissues. Cells are extracted from tissues by mechanical scraping or mincing to release cells or by an enzymatic method using trypsin or collagenase to break up tissue and release single cells into suspension. Because of anchorage-dependence requirements, primary cell cultures require a liquid culture medium in a Petri dish or tissue-culture flask so cells have a solid surface such as glass or plastic for attachment and growth. Primary cultures usually have a limited life span. When cells in a primary culture undergo mitosis and a sufficient density of cells is produced, cells come in contact with other cells. When this cell-to-cell-contact occurs, mitosis is triggered to stop. This is called  **contact inhibition** and it prevents the density of the cells from becoming too high. To prevent contact inhibition, cells from the primary cell culture must be transferred to another vessel with fresh growth medium. This is called a secondary cell culture. Periodically, cell density must be reduced by pouring off some cells and adding fresh medium to provide space and nutrients to maintain cell growth. In contrast to primary cell cultures,  **continuous cell line**s, usually derived from transformed cells or tumors, are often able to be subcultured many times or even grown indefinitely (in which case they are called immortal). Continuous cell lines may not exhibit  **anchorage dependency** (they will grow in suspension) and may have lost their contact inhibition. As a result, continuous cell lines can grow in piles or lumps resembling small tumor growths (see {'Figure_6_3_cult Figure 6.3.cult}).


{image:'Figure_6_3_cult}
        

An example of an immortal cell line is the  **HeLa cell line**, which was originally cultivated from tumor cells obtained from Henrietta  **Lacks**, a patient who died of cervical cancer in 1951. HeLa cells were the first continuous tissue-culture cell line and were used to establish tissue culture as an important technology for research in cell biology, virology, and medicine. Prior to the discovery of HeLa cells, scientists were not able to establish tissue cultures with any reliability or stability. More than six decades later, this cell line is still alive and being used for medical research. See  to read more about this important cell line and the controversial means by which it was obtained.
