index: hide
name: The Central Nervous System

The  **brain** is the most complex and sensitive organ in the body. It is responsible for all functions of the body, including serving as the coordinating center for all sensations, mobility, emotions, and intellect. Protection for the brain is provided by the bones of the skull, which in turn are covered by the scalp, as shown in {'Figure_26_1_Meninges Figure 26.1.Meninges}. The scalp is composed of an outer layer of skin, which is loosely attached to the  **aponeurosis**, a flat, broad tendon layer that anchors the superficial layers of the skin. The  **periosteum**, below the aponeurosis, firmly encases the bones of the skull and provides protection, nutrition to the bone, and the capacity for bone repair. Below the boney layer of the skull are three layers of membranes called  **meninges** that surround the brain. The relative positions of these meninges are shown in {'Figure_26_1_Meninges Figure 26.1.Meninges}. The meningeal layer closest to the bones of the skull is called the  **dura mater** (literally meaning  *tough mother*). Below the dura mater lies the  **arachnoid mater** (literally  *spider-like mother*). The innermost meningeal layer is a delicate membrane called the  **pia mater** (literally  *tender mother*). Unlike the other meningeal layers, the pia mater firmly adheres to the convoluted surface of the brain. Between the arachnoid mater and pia mater is the  **subarachnoid space**. The subarachnoid space within this region is filled with  **cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)**. This watery fluid is produced by cells of the choroid plexus—areas in each ventricle of the brain that consist of cuboidal epithelial cells surrounding dense capillary beds. The CSF serves to deliver nutrients and remove waste from neural tissues.


{image:'Figure_26_1_NervSys}
        


{image:'Figure_26_1_Meninges}
        

## The Blood-Brain Barrier

The tissues of the CNS have extra protection in that they are not exposed to blood or the immune system in the same way as other tissues. The blood vessels that supply the brain with nutrients and other chemical substances lie on top of the pia mater. The capillaries associated with these blood vessels in the brain are less permeable than those in other locations in the body. The capillary endothelial cells form tight junctions that control the transfer of blood components to the brain. In addition, cranial capillaries have far fewer fenestra (pore-like structures that are sealed by a membrane) and pinocytotic vesicles than other capillaries. As a result, materials in the circulatory system have a very limited ability to interact with the CNS directly. This phenomenon is referred to as the  **blood-brain barrier**.

The blood-brain barrier protects the cerebrospinal fluid from contamination, and can be quite effective at excluding potential microbial pathogens. As a consequence of these defenses, there is no normal  **microbiota** in the cerebrospinal fluid. The blood-brain barrier also inhibits the movement of many drugs into the brain, particularly compounds that are not lipid soluble. This has profound ramifications for treatments involving infections of the CNS, because it is difficult for drugs to cross the blood-brain barrier to interact with pathogens that cause infections.

The  **spinal cord** also has protective structures similar to those surrounding the brain. Within the bones of the vertebrae are meninges of dura mater (sometimes called the  **dural sheath**), arachnoid mater, pia mater, and a  **blood-spinal cord barrier** that controls the transfer of blood components from blood vessels associated with the spinal cord.

To cause an infection in the CNS, pathogens must successfully breach the blood-brain barrier or blood-spinal cord barrier. Various pathogens employ different  **virulence factors** and mechanisms to achieve this, but they can generally be grouped into four categories: intercellular (also called paracellular), transcellular, leukocyte facilitated, and nonhematogenous. Intercellular entry involves the use of microbial virulence factors, toxins, or inflammation-mediated processes to pass between the cells of the blood-brain barrier. In transcellular entry, the pathogen passes through the cells of the blood-brain barrier using virulence factors that allow it to adhere to and trigger uptake by vacuole- or receptor-mediated mechanisms. Leukocyte-facilitated entry is a Trojan-horse mechanism that occurs when a pathogen infects peripheral blood leukocytes to directly enter the CNS. Nonhematogenous entry allows pathogens to enter the brain without encountering the blood-brain barrier; it occurs when pathogens travel along either the olfactory or trigeminal cranial nerves that lead directly into the CNS.
