index: hide
name: The Calvin Cycle

In plants, carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) enters the leaves through stomata, where it diffuses over short distances through intercellular spaces until it reaches the mesophyll cells. Once in the mesophyll cells, CO<sub>2</sub> diffuses into the stroma of the chloroplast—the site of light-independent reactions of photosynthesis. These reactions actually have several names associated with them. Another term, the  **Calvin cycle**, is named for the man who discovered it, and because these reactions function as a cycle. Others call it the Calvin-Benson cycle to include the name of another scientist involved in its discovery. The most outdated name is dark reactions, because light is not directly required (). However, the term dark reaction can be misleading because it implies incorrectly that the reaction only occurs at night or is independent of light, which is why most scientists and instructors no longer use it.


{image:'Figure_8_3_1f}
        

The light-independent reactions of the Calvin cycle can be organized into three basic stages: fixation, reduction, and regeneration.

## Stage 1: Fixation

In the stroma, in addition to CO<sub>2</sub>,<sub> </sub>two other components are present to initiate the light-independent reactions: an enzyme called ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO), and three molecules of ribulose bisphosphate (RuBP), as shown in . RuBP has five atoms of carbon, flanked by two phosphates.

RuBisCO catalyzes a reaction between CO<sub>2</sub> and RuBP. For each CO<sub>2</sub> molecule that reacts with one RuBP, two molecules of another compound (3-PGA) form. PGA has three carbons and one phosphate. Each turn of the cycle involves only one RuBP and one carbon dioxide and forms two molecules of 3-PGA. The number of carbon atoms remains the same, as the atoms move to form new bonds during the reactions (3 atoms from 3CO<sub>2</sub> + 15 atoms from 3RuBP = 18 atoms in 3 atoms of 3-PGA). This process is called  **carbon** **fixation**, because CO<sub>2</sub> is “fixed” from an inorganic form into organic molecules.

## Stage 2: Reduction

ATP and NADPH are used to convert the six molecules of 3-PGA into six molecules of a chemical called glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate (G3P). That is a reduction reaction because it involves the gain of electrons by 3-PGA. Recall that a  **reduction** is the gain of an electron by an atom or molecule. Six molecules of both ATP and NADPH are used. For ATP, energy is released with the loss of the terminal phosphate atom, converting it into ADP; for NADPH, both energy and a hydrogen atom are lost, converting it into NADP<sup>+</sup>. Both of these molecules return to the nearby light-dependent reactions to be reused and reenergized.

## Stage 3: Regeneration

Interestingly, at this point, only one of the G3P molecules leaves the Calvin cycle and is sent to the cytoplasm to contribute to the formation of other compounds needed by the plant. Because the G3P exported from the chloroplast has three carbon atoms, it takes three “turns” of the Calvin cycle to fix enough net carbon to export one G3P. But each turn makes two G3Ps, thus three turns make six G3Ps. One is exported while the remaining five G3P molecules remain in the cycle and are used to regenerate RuBP, which enables the system to prepare for more CO<sub>2</sub> to be fixed. Three more molecules of ATP are used in these regeneration reactions.


{image:'Figure_8_3_3}
        
