index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 7.5.4
title: 7.5.4 - Estimate of Effective Radiative Forcing from Aerosol–Cloud Interactions Alone

{Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_cloud_interactions ERFaci} refers to changes in TOA radiation since pre-industrial times due only to {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol}–cloud interactions, i.e., {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} effects augmented by possible changes in cloud amount and {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime}. As stated in {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_1 Section 7.5.1}, we do not discuss {Glossary.*Radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_cloud_interactions RFaci} by itself because it is an academic construct. However, processes in {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} that tend to affect RFaci such as changes to the droplet size distribution breadth (e.g., {cite.7.'Rotstayn_and_Liu_2005}) will also affect ERFaci. Early studies evaluated just the change in {Glossary.*Shortwave_radiation shortwave radiation} or cloud {Glossary.*Radiative_effect radiative effect} for ERFaci, but lately the emphasis has changed to report changes in net TOA radiation for ERFaci. As discussed in {Chapters.7.7_5.7_5_3 Section 7.5.3}, evaluating ERFaci from changes in net TOA radiation is the only correct method, and therefore this is used whenever possible also in this section. However some earlier estimates of ERFaci only reported changes in {Glossary.*Cloud_radiative_effect cloud radiative effect}, which we show in {'Figure_7_19 Figure 7.19} as the last resort. However, estimates of changes in cloud radiative effect can differ quite substantially from those in net radiation if rapid adjustments to aerosol–cloud interactions induce changes in clear-sky radiation.

Cloud amount and lifetime effects manifest themselves in {Glossary.*Semi_empirical_model GCMs} via their representation of autoconversion of cloud droplets to rain, a process that is inversely dependent on droplet concentration. Thus, ERFaci and {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing_due_to_aerosol_radiation_interactions ERFari}+aci have been found to be very sensitive to the autoconversion {Glossary.*Parameterization parameterization} ({cite.7.'Rotstayn_2000}; {cite.7.'Golaz_et_al_2011}; {cite.7.'Wang_et_al_2012}). GCMs probably underestimate the extent to which precipitation is formed via raindrop accretion of cloud droplets ({cite.7.'Wood_2005}), a process that is insensitive to aerosol and droplet concentration. Indeed, models that remedy this imbalance in precipitation formation between autoconversion and accretion ({cite.7.'Posselt_and_Lohmann_2009}; {cite.7.'Wang_et_al_2012}) exhibit weaker ERFaci in agreement with small-scale studies that typically do not show a systematic increase in cloud lifetime because of entrainment and because smaller droplets also evaporate more readily ({cite.7.'Jiang_et_al_2006}; {cite.7.'Bretherton_et_al_2007}). Bottom-up estimates of ERFaci are shown in {'Figure_7_19 Figure 7.19}. Their median estimate of –1.4 W m–2 is more negative than our expert judgement of ERFari+aci because of the limitations of these studies discussed above.

There is conflicting evidence for the importance of ERFaci associated with cirrus, ranging from a statistically significant impact on cirrus coverage ({cite.7.'Hendricks_et_al_2005}) to a very small effect ({cite.7.'Liu_et_al_2009}). {cite.7.'Penner_et_al_2009 Penner et al. (2009)} obtained a rather large negative RFaci of {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} ice-forming aerosol on upper tropospheric clouds of –0.67 to –0.53 W m–2; however, they ignored potential compensating effects on lower lying clouds. A new study based on two GCMs and different ways to deduce ERFaci on cirrus clouds estimates ERFaci to be +0.27 ± 0.1 W m–2 ({cite.7.'Gettelman_et_al_2012}), thus rendering aerosol effects on cirrus clouds smaller than previously estimated and of opposite sign.

One reason for having switched to providing an expert judgment estimate of ERFari+aci rather than of ERFaci is that the individual contributions are very difficult to disentangle. The individual components can be isolated only if linearity of ERFari and ERFaci is assumed but there is no a priori reason why the ERFs should be additive because by definition they occur in a system that is constantly readjusting to multiple nonlinear {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings}. Nevertheless assuming additivity, ERFaci could be obtained as the difference between ERFari+aci and ERFari. This yields an ERFaci estimate of –0.45 W m–2, that is, much smaller than the median ERFaci value of –1.4 W m–2 (see above and {'Figure_7_19 Figure 7.19}). This discrepancy arises because the GCM estimates of ERFaci do not consider secondary processes and because these studies are not necessarily conducted with the same GCMs that estimate ERFari+aci. This difference could also be a measure of the non-linearity of the ERFs. A 90% {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} range of –1.2 to 0 W m–2 is adopted for ERFaci, which accounts for the error covariance between ERFari and ERFaci and the larger uncertainty on the lower bound. In summary, there is much less confidence associated with the estimate of ERFaci than with the estimate of ERFari+aci.
