index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.3.1.1.4
title: 10.3.1.1.4 - Attribution of regional surface temperature change

{Glossary.*Anthropogenic Anthropogenic} influence on climate has been robustly detected on the global scale, but for many applications an estimate of the anthropogenic contribution to recent temperature trends over a particular {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} is more useful. However, detection and attribution of climate change at continental and smaller scales is more difficult than on the global scale for several reasons ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b}; {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2010}).

First, the relative contribution of {Topics.*Climate_Variability internal variability} compared to the forced response to observed changes tends to be larger on smaller scales, as spatial differences in internal variations are averaged out in large-scale means. Second, because the patterns of response to climate forcings tend to be large scale, there is less spatial information to help distinguish between the responses to different forcings when attention is restricted to a sub-global area. Third, forcings omitted in some global climate model simulations may be important on regional scales, such as {Topics.*Land_Use_Change land use change} or {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol}. Lastly, simulated internal variability and responses to forcings may be less reliable on smaller scales than on the global scale. {cite.10.'Knutson_et_al_2013 Knutson et al. (2013)} find a tendency for CMIP5 models to overestimate decadal variability in the NH extratropics in individual grid cells and underestimate it elsewhere, although {cite.10.'Karoly_and_Wu_2005 Karoly and Wu (2005)} and {cite.10.'Wu_and_Karoly_2007 Wu and Karoly (2007)} find that variability is not generally underestimated in earlier generation models.

Based on several studies, {cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b Hegerl et al. (2007b)} concluded that ‘it is likely that there has been a substantial anthropogenic contribution to {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} increases in every continent except Antarctica since the middle of the 20th century’. {'Figure_10_7 Figure 10.7} shows comparisons of observed continental scale temperatures ({cite.10.'Morice_et_al_2012}) with CMIP5 simulations including both anthropogenic and natural forcings (red lines) and including just natural forcings (blue lines). Observed temperatures are largely within the range of simulations with {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcings} for all regions and outside the range of simulations with only natural forcings for all regions except Antarctica (Jones et al., 2013 ). Averaging over all observed locations, Antarctica has warmed over the 1950–2008 period ({Chapters.2.2_4.2_4_1.2_4_1_1 Section 2.4.1.1}; {cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2008b}; Jones et al., 2013 ), even though some individual locations have cooled, particularly in summer and autumn, and over the shorter 1960–1999 period ({cite.10.'Thompson_and_Solomon_2002}; {cite.10.'Turner_et_al_2005}). When temperature changes associated with changes in the {Glossary.*Southern_Annular_Mode Southern Annular Mode} are removed by regression, both observations and model simulations indicate warming at all observed locations except the South Pole over the 1950–1999 period ({cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2008b}). An analysis of Antarctic land temperatures over the period 1950–1999 detected separate natural and anthropogenic responses of consistent magnitude in simulations and observations ({cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2008b}). Thus anthropogenic influence on climate has now been detected on all seven continents. However the evidence for {Topics.*Human_Influence human influence} on Antarctic temperature is much weaker than for the other six continental regions. There is only one attribution study for this region, and there is greater observational uncertainty than the other regions, with very few data before 1950, and sparse coverage that is mainly limited to the coast and the Antarctic Peninsula. As a result of the observational {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}, there is low confidence in Antarctic region land surface air temperatures changes ({Chapters.2.2_4.2_4_1.2_4_1_1 Section 2.4.1.1}) and we conclude for Antarctica there is low confidence that anthropogenic influence has contributed to the observed warming averaged over available stations.

{image:'Figure_10_7}

Since the publication of the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} several other studies have applied attribution analyses to continental and sub-continental scale regions. {cite.10.'Min_and_Hense_2007 Min and Hense (2007)} applied a Bayesian decision analysis technique to continental-scale temperatures using the CMIP3 multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} and concluded that forcing combinations including GHG increases provide the best explanation of 20th century observed changes in temperature on every inhabited continent except Europe, where the observational evidence is not decisive in their analysis. {cite.10.'Jones_et_al_2008 Jones et al. (2008)} detected anthropogenic influence on summer temperatures over all NH continents and in many subcontinental NH land regions in an optimal detection analysis that considered the temperature responses to anthropogenic and natural forcings. {cite.10.'Christidis_et_al_2010 Christidis et al. (2010)} used a multi-model ensemble constrained by global-scale observed temperature changes to estimate the changes in probability of occurrence of warming or cooling trends over the 1950–1997 period over various sub-continental scale regions. They concluded that the probability of occurrence of warming trends had been at least doubled by anthropogenic forcing over all such regions except Central North America. The estimated distribution of warming trends over the Central North America region was approximately centred on the observed {Glossary.*Trend trend}, so no inconsistency between simulated and observed trends was identified there. {cite.10.'Knutson_et_al_2013 Knutson et al. (2013)} demonstrated that observed temperature trends from the beginning of the observational record to 2010 averaged over Europe, Africa, Northern Asia, Southern Asia, Australia and South America are all inconsistent with the simulated response to natural forcings alone, and consistent with the simulated response to combined natural and anthropogenic forcings in the CMIP5 models. They reached a similar conclusion for the major ocean basins with the exception of the North Atlantic, where variability is high.

Several recent studies have applied attribution analyses to specific sub-continental regions. Anthropogenic influence has been found in winter minimum temperature over the western USA ({cite.10.'Bonfils_et_al_2008}; {cite.10.'Pierce_et_al_2009}), a conclusion that is found to be robust to weighting models according to various aspects of their climatology ({cite.10.'Pierce_et_al_2009}); anthropogenic influence has been found in temperature trends over New Zealand ({cite.10.'Dean_and_Stott_2009}) after circulation-related variability is removed as in {cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2000 Gillett et al. (2000)}; and anthropogenic influence has been found in temperature trends over France, using a first-order autoregressive model of internal variability ({cite.10.'Ribes_et_al_2010}). Increases in anthropogenic {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} were found to be the main driver of the 20th-century {Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST} increases in both Atlantic and Pacific tropical cyclogenesis regions ({cite.10.'Santer_et_al_2006}; {cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2008a}). Over both regions, the response to anthropogenic forcings is detected when the response to natural forcings is also included in the analysis ({cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2008a}). {cite.10.'Knutson_et_al_2013 Knutson et al. (2013)} detect an anthropogenic influence over Canada, but not over the continental USA, Alaska or Mexico.

{cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2008b Gillett et al. (2008b)} detect anthropogenic influence on near-surface Arctic temperatures over land, with a consistent magnitude in simulations and observations. {cite.10.'Wang_et_al_2007 Wang et al. (2007)} also find that observed Arctic warming is inconsistent with simulated internal variability. Both studies ascribe Arctic warmth in the 1930s and 1940s largely to internal variability. {cite.10.'Shindell_and_Faluvegi_2009 Shindell and Faluvegi (2009)} infer a large contribution to both mid-century Arctic cooling and late century warming from aerosol forcing changes, with GHGs the dominant driver of long-term warming, though they infer aerosol forcing changes from temperature changes using an inverse approach which may lead to some changes associated with internal variability being {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to aerosol forcing. We therefore conclude that despite the uncertainties introduced by limited observational coverage, high internal variability, modelling uncertainties ({cite.10.'Crook_et_al_2011}) and poorly understood local forcings, such as the effect of BC on snow, there is sufficiently strong evidence to conclude that it is likely that there has been an anthropogenic contribution to the very substantial warming in Arctic land {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures} over the past 50 years.

Some attribution analyses have considered temperature trends at the climate model grid box scale. At these spatial scales robust attribution is difficult to obtain, since {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} often lack the processes needed to simulate regional details realistically, regionally important forcings may be missing in some models and observational uncertainties are very large for some regions of the world at grid box scale ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b}; {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2010}). Nevertheless an attribution analysis has been carried out on Central England temperature, a record that extends back to 1659 and is sufficiently long to demonstrate that the representation of multi-decadal variability in the single grid box in the model used, Hadley Centre climate {Topics.*Climate_Predictions prediction} model 3 (HadCM3) is adequate for detection ({cite.10.'Karoly_and_Stott_2006}). The observed trend in Central England Temperature is inconsistent with either internal variability or the simulated response to natural forcings, but is consistent with the simulated response when anthropogenic forcings are included ({cite.10.'Karoly_and_Stott_2006}).

Observed 20th century grid cell trends from Hadley Centre/Climatic Research Unit gridded surface temperature data set 2v (HadCRUT2v; {cite.10.'Jones_et_al_2001}) are inconsistent with simulated internal variability at the 10% significance level in around 80% of grid cells even using HadCM2 which was found to overestimate variability in 5-year mean temperatures at most latitudes ({cite.10.'Karoly_and_Wu_2005}). Sixty percent of grid cells were found to exhibit significant warming trends since 1951, a much larger number than expected by chance ({cite.10.'Karoly_and_Wu_2005}; {cite.10.'Wu_and_Karoly_2007}), and similar results apply when circulation-related variability is first regressed out ({cite.10.'Wu_and_Karoly_2007}). However, as discussed in the AR4 ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b}), when a global field significance test is applied, this becomes a global detection study; since not all grid cells exhibit significant warming trends the overall interpretation of the results in terms of attribution at individual locations remains problematic. {cite.10.'Mahlstein_et_al_2012 Mahlstein et al. (2012)} find significant changes in summer season temperatures in about 40% of low-latitude and about 20% of extratropical land grid cells with sufficient observations, when testing against the null hypothesis of no change in the distribution of summer temperatures. Observed grid cell trends are compared with CMIP5 simulated trends in {'Figure_10_2 Figure 10.2}i, which shows that in the great majority (89%) of grid cells with sufficient observational coverage, observed trends over the 1901–2010 period are inconsistent with a combination of simulated internal variability and the response to natural forcings (Jones et al., 2013). {cite.10.'Knutson_et_al_2013 Knutson et al. (2013)} find some deficiencies in the simulation of multi-decadal variability at the grid cell scale in CMIP5 models, but demonstrate that trends at more than 75% of individual grid cells with sufficient observational coverage in HadCRUT4 are inconsistent with the simulated response to natural forcings alone, and consistent or larger than the simulated response to combined anthropogenic and natural forcings in CMIP5 models.

In summary, it is likely that anthropogenic forcing has made a substantial contribution to the warming of each of the inhabited continents since 1950. For Antarctica large observational uncertainties result in low confidence that anthropogenic influence has contributed to the observed warming averaged over available stations. Anthropogenic influence has likely contributed to temperature change in many sub-continental regions. {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution Detection} and attribution of climate change at continental and smaller scales is more difficult than at the global scale due to the greater contribution of internal variability, the greater difficulty of distinguishing between different causal factors, and greater errors in climate models’ representation of regional details. Nevertheless, statistically significant warming trends are observed at a majority of grid cells, and the observed warming is inconsistent with estimates of possible warming due to natural causes at the great majority of grid cells with sufficient observational coverage.
