index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 2.4.4.1
title: 2.4.4.1 - Advances in Multi-Decadal Observational Records

The major global radiosonde records extend back to 1958, with temperatures, measured as the balloon ascends, reported at mandatory pressure levels. Satellites have monitored tropospheric and lower stratospheric temperature trends since late 1978 through the Microwave Sounding Unit ({Glossary.*Microwave_Sounding_Unit MSU}) and its follow-on Advanced Microwave Sounding Unit (AMSU) since 1998. These measures of upwelling radiation represent bulk (volume averaged) atmospheric temperature ({'Figure_2_23 Figure 2.23}). The ‘Mid-Tropospheric’ (MT) MSU channel that most directly corresponds to the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} has 10 to 15% of its signal from both the skin temperature of the Earth’s surface and the stratosphere. Two alternative approaches have been suggested for removing the stratospheric component based on differencing of view angles (LT) and statistical recombination (&#42;G) with the ‘Lower {Glossary.*Stratosphere Stratosphere}’ (LS) channel ({cite.2.'Spencer_and_Christy_1992}; {cite.2.'Fu_et_al_2004}). The MSU satellite series also included a Stratospheric Sounding Unit (SSU) that measured at higher altitudes ({cite.2.'Seidel_et_al_2011}). effects were inter-satellite offset determinations and, for tropospheric channels, diurnal drift. Uncertainties were concluded to be of the order 0.1°C per decade at the global mean for both tropospheric channels (where it is of comparable magnitude to the long-term trends) and the stratospheric channel.

{image:'Figure_2_23}

SSU provides the only long-term near-global temperature data above the lower stratosphere, with the series terminating in 2006. Some AMSU-A channels have replaced this capability and efforts to understand the effect of changed measurement properties have been undertaken ({cite.2.'Kobayashi_et_al_2009}). Until recently only one SSU data set existed ({cite.2.'Nash_and_Edge_1989}), updated by {cite.2.'Randel_et_al_2009 Randel et al. (2009)}. {cite.2.'Liu_and_Weng_2009 Liu and Weng (2009)} have produced an intermediate analysis for Channels 25 and 26 (but not Channel 27). Wang et al. (2012g), building on insights from several of these recent studies, have produced a more complete analysis. Differences between the independent estimates are much larger than differences between MSU records or radiosonde records at lower levels, with substantial inter-decadal time series behaviour departures, zonal {Glossary.*Trend trend} structure, and global trend differences of the order 0.5°C per decade ({cite.2.'Seidel_et_al_2011}; {cite.2.'Thompson_et_al_2012}; Wang et al., 2012g). Although all SSU data sets agree that the stratosphere is cooling, there is therefore low confidence in the details above the lower stratosphere.

In summary, many new data sets have been produced since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} from radiosondes and satellites with renewed interest in satellite measurements above the lower stratosphere. Several studies have attempted to quantify the parametric {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} ({Box_2_1 Box 2.1}) more rigorously. These various data sets and analyses have served to highlight the degree of uncertainty in the data and derived products.
