index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 11.2.1.2
title: 11.2.1.2 - Prognostic Predictability Studies

Prognostic predictability studies analyse the behaviour of models integrated forward in time from perturbed initial conditions. The study of {cite.11.'Griffies_and_Bryan_1997 Griffies and Bryan (1997)} is one of the earliest studies of the predictability of internally generated decadal variability in a coupled {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}–ocean {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model}. The study concentrates on the North Atlantic and the subsurface ocean temperature while the subsequent studies of {cite.11.'Boer_2000 Boer (2000)} and {cite.11.'Collins_2002 Collins (2002)} deal mainly with {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature}. Long time scale temperature variability in the North Atlantic has received considerable attention together with its possible connection to the variability of the Atlantic {Glossary.*Meridional_Overturning_Circulation Meridional Overturning Circulation} (AMOC) in predictability studies by {cite.11.'Collins_and_Sinha_2003 Collins and Sinha (2003)}, {cite.11.'Collins_et_al_2006 Collins et al. (2006)}, {cite.11.'Dunstone_and_Smith_2010 Dunstone and Smith (2010)}, {cite.11.'Dunstone_et_al_2011 Dunstone et al. (2011)}, {cite.11.'Grotzner_et_al_1999 Grotzner et al. (1999)}, {cite.11.'Hawkins_and_Sutton_2009 Hawkins and Sutton (2009)}, Latif et al. (2006, 2007), {cite.11.'Msadek_et_al_2010 Msadek et al. (2010)}, {cite.11.'Persechino_et_al_2012 Persechino et al. (2012)}, Pohlmann et al. (2004, 2013), {cite.11.'Swingedouw_et_al_2013 Swingedouw et al. (2013)}, and {cite.11.'Teng_et_al_2011 Teng et al. (2011)}. The predictability of the AMOC varies among models and, to some extent, with initial model states, ranging from several to 10 or more years. The predictability values are model-based and the realism of the simulated AMOC in the models cannot be easily judged in the absence of a sufficiently long record of observation-based AMOC values. Many predictability studies are based on perturbations to surface quantities but Sevellec and A. Fedorov (2012) and {cite.11.'Zanna_2012 Zanna (2012)} note that small perturbations to deep ocean quantities may also affect upper ocean values. The predictability of the North Atlantic sea {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} ({Glossary.*Sea_Surface_Temperature SST}) is typically weaker than that of the AMOC and the connection between the predictability of the AMOC, and the SST is inconsistent among models.

Prognostic predictability studies of the Pacific are less plentiful although {Glossary.*Pacific_decadal_variability Pacific Decadal Variability} (PDV) mechanisms (including the Pacific Decadal Oscillation ({Glossary.*Pacific_Decadal_Oscillation PDO}) and the Inter-decadal Pacific Oscillation (IPO) have received considerable study (see Chapters {Chapters.2} and {Chapters.12}). {cite.11.'Power_and_Colman_2006 Power and Colman (2006)} find predictability on multi-year time scales in SST and on decadal time-scales in the sub-surface ocean temperature in the off-equatorial South Pacific in their model. {cite.11.'Power_et_al_2006 Power et al. (2006)} find no evidence for the predictability of inter-decadal changes in the nature of El Niño-{Glossary.*Southern_Oscillation Southern Oscillation} ({Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO}) impacts on Australian rainfall. {cite.11.'Sun_and_Wang_2006 Sun and Wang (2006)} suggest that some of the temperature variability linked to PDV can be {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predicted} approximately 7 years in advance. {cite.11.'Teng_et_al_2011 Teng et al. (2011)} investigate the predictability of the first two Empirical Orthogonal Functions (EOFs) of annual mean SST and upper ocean temperature identified with PDV and find predictability of the order of 6 to 10 years. {cite.11.'Meehl_et_al_2010 Meehl et al. (2010)} consider the predictability of 19-year filtered Pacific SSTs in terms of low order EOFs and find predictability on these long time scales.

{cite.11.'Hermanson_and_Sutton_2010 Hermanson and Sutton (2010)} report that predictable signals in different regions and for different variables may arise from differing initial conditions and that ocean heat content is more predictable than atmospheric and surface variables. {cite.11.'Branstator_and_Teng_2010 Branstator and Teng (2010)} analyse upper ocean temperatures, and some SSTs, for averages over the North Atlantic, North Pacific and the tropical Atlantic and Pacific in the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) model. {Glossary.*Predictability Predictability} associated with the initial state of the system decreases whereas that due to {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing external forcing} increases with time. The ‘cross-over’ time, when the two contributions are equal, is longer in extratropical (7 to 11 years) compared to tropical (2 years) regions and in the North Atlantic compared to the North Pacific. {cite.11.'Boer_et_al_2013 Boer et al. (2013)} estimate surface air (rather than upper ocean) temperature predictability in the Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis (CCCma) model and find a cross-over time (using a different measure) on the order of 3 years when averaged over the globe.
