index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.4.2.3
title: 4.4.2.3 - Antarctica

Antarctic results from the gravity method are also now more numerous and consistent than in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({'Figure_4_14 Figure 4.14}a-c). Methods combining GPS and GRACE at the regional level indicate with high confidence that the Antarctic Peninsula is losing ice ({cite.4.'Ivins_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'Thomas_et_al_2011a}). In other areas, large {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} remain in the global GRACEGPS solutions ({cite.4.'Wu_et_al_2010}).

The SMB reconstructions used in the mass budget method have improved considerably since AR4 (e.g., Rignot et al. 2008b; van den Broeke et al., 2006; {cite.4.'Lenaerts_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}). Reconstructed snowfall from regional atmospheric {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} indicates higher {Glossary.*Accumulation accumulation} along the coastal sectors than in previous estimates, but little difference in total snowfall. There is medium confidence that there has been no long-term {Glossary.*Trend trend} in the total accumulation over the continent over the past few decades ({cite.4.'Monaghan_et_al_2006}; van den Broeke et al., 2006; {cite.4.'Bromwich_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'Frezzotti_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Lenaerts_et_al_2012}). Although anomalies in accumulation have been noted in recent decades in Eastern Wilkes Land ({cite.4.'Boening_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}) and Law Dome (Van Ommen and Morgan, 2010) in East Antarctica, their overall impact on total mass balance is not significant. Satellite laser {Glossary.*Altimetry altimetry} indicates that ice volume changes are concentrated on outlet glaciers and ice streams (see Glossary), as illustrated by the strong correspondence between areas of thinning ({'Figure_4_14 Figure 4.14}f) and areas of fast flow ({'Figure_4_14 Figure 4.14}e) ({cite.4.'Pritchard_et_al_2009}).

{'Figure_4_16 Figure 4.16} shows the cumulative ice mass loss from the Antarctic {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet} over the period 1992–2012 derived from recent studies made by 10 different research groups ({cite.4.'Cazenave_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'E_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Horwath_and_Dietrich_2009}; {cite.4.'Velicogna_2009}; {cite.4.'Wu_et_al_2010}; Rignot et al., 2011c; {cite.4.'Shi_et_al_2011}; {cite.4.'King_et_al_2012}; {cite.4.'Tang_et_al_2012}). These studies do not include earlier estimates from the same researchers when those have been updated by more recent analyses using extended data. They include estimates made from satellite gravimetry, satellite altimetry and the mass balance method. Details of the studies used for Antarctica are listed in Table 4.A.3 (additional studies not selected are listed in Table 4.A.4). The number of estimates available varies with time, with only one estimate per year in the 1990s and up to 10 per year from 2003. The cumulative curves and associated errors are derived in the same way as those for {'Figure_4_15 Figure 4.15} (see {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_2.4_4_2_2 Section 4.4.2.2}).

{image:'Figure_4_16}

{image:'Figure_4_2}

Overall, there is high confidence that the Antarctic ice sheet is currently losing mass. The average ice mass change to Antarctica from the present assessment has been –97 [–135 to –58] Gt yr–1 (a {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} equivalent of 0.27 mm yr–1 [0.37 to 0.16] mm yr–1) over the period 1993–2010, and –147 [–221 to –74] Gt yr–1 (0.41 [0.61 to 0.20] mm yr–1) over the period 2005–2010. These assessments include the Antarctic peripheral glaciers.

The recent IMBIE intercomparison ({cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}) for Antarctica, where the {Glossary.*Glacial_isostatic_adjustment GIA} signal is less well known than in Greenland, used two new GIA models (an updated version of {cite.4.'Ivins_and_James_2005 Ivins and James (2005)}, for details see {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012 Shepherd et al. (2012)}; and {cite.4.'Whitehouse_et_al_2012 Whitehouse et al. (2012)}). These new models had the effect of reducing the estimates of East Antarctic ice mass loss from GRACE data, compared with some previous estimates. For Antarctica, {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012 Shepherd et al. (2012)} estimate an average change in mass for 1992–2011 of –71 ± 53 Gt yr–1 (0.20 ± 0.15 mm yr–1 of sea level equivalent). For the same period this present assessment estimates a loss of 88 ± 35 Gt yr–1 at the 90% confidence level (0.24 ± 0.10 mm yr–1 {Glossary.*Sea_level_equivalent SLE}). Averaging across technique ensembles in the present assessment, rather than individual estimates, yields no significant difference.

There is low confidence that the rate of Antarctic ice loss has increased over the last two decades ({cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Velicogna_2009}; Rignot et al., 2011c; {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}); however, GRACE data gives medium confidence of increasing loss over the last decade ({cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Velicogna_2009}) ({'Figure_4_16 Figure 4.16}). For GRACE, this conclusion is independent of the GIA signal, which is constant over the measurement period. The mass budget method suggests that the increase in loss from the mass budget method is caused by an increase in glacier flow-speed in the eastern part of the Pacific sector of West Antarctica ({cite.4.'Rignot_2008}; {cite.4.'Joughin_et_al_2010a}) and the Antarctic Peninsula ({cite.4.'Scambos_et_al_2004}; {cite.4.'Pritchard_and_Vaughan_2007}; {cite.4.'Rott_et_al_2011}). Comparison of GRACE and the mass budget method for 1992–2010 indicates an increase in the rate of ice loss of, on average, 14 ± 2 Gt yr–1 per year compared with 21 ± 2 Gt yr–1 per year on average for Greenland during the same time period (Rignot et al., 2011c). The recent IMBIE analysis ({cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012}) shows that the West Antarctic ice sheet and the Antarctic Peninsula are losing mass at an increasing rate, but that East Antarctica gained an average of 21 ± 43 Gt yr–1 between 1992 and 2011. {cite.4.'Zwally_and_Giovinetto_2011 Zwally and Giovinetto (2011)} also estimate a mass gain for East Antarctica (+16 Gt yr–1 between 1992 and 2001). Their reassessment of total Antarctic change made a correction for the ice discharge estimates from regions of the ice sheet not observed in the mass budget method (see {Chapters.4.4_4.4_4_2.4_4_2_1.4_4_2_1_1 Section 4.4.2.1.1}). The analysis of {cite.4.'Shepherd_et_al_2012 Shepherd et al. (2012)} indicated that the missing regions contribute little to the total mass change.

In the near-absence of surface {Glossary.*Runoff runoff} and, as discussed in this section, with no evidence of multi-decadal change in total snowfall, there is high confidence that Antarctic multi-decadal changes in grounded ice mass must be due to increased ice discharge, although the observational record of ice dynamics extends only from the 1970s and is spatially incomplete for much of this period. Over shorter time scales, however, the interannual to decadal variability in snowfall has an important impact on ice sheet mass balance (Rignot et al., 2011c).

The three techniques are in excellent agreement as to the spatial pattern of ice loss (thinning) and gain (thickening) over Antarctica ({'Figure_4_14 Figure 4.14}). There is very high confidence that the largest ice losses are located along the northern tip of the Antarctic Peninsula where the collapse of several ice shelves in the last two decades triggered the acceleration of outlet glaciers, and in the Amundsen Sea, in West Antarctica ({'Figure_4_14 Figure 4.14}).. On the Antarctic Peninsula, there is evidence that precipitation has increased ({cite.4.'Thomas_et_al_2008a}) but the resulting ice-gain is insufficient to counteract the losses ({cite.4.'Wendt_et_al_2010}; {cite.4.'Ivins_et_al_2011}). There is medium confidence that changes in the Amundsen Sea {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} are due to the thinning of ice shelves ({cite.4.'Pritchard_et_al_2012}), and medium confidence that this is due to high ocean heat flux ({cite.4.'Jacobs_et_al_2011}), which caused {Glossary.*Grounding_line grounding line} retreat (1 km yr–1) ({cite.4.'Joughin_et_al_2010a}) and glacier thinning ({cite.4.'Wingham_et_al_2009}). Indications of dynamic change are also evident in East Antarctica, primarily around Totten {Glossary.*Glacier Glacier}, from GRACE ({cite.4.'Chen_et_al_2009}), altimetry ({cite.4.'Wingham_et_al_2006}; {cite.4.'Shepherd_and_Wingham_2007}; {cite.4.'Pritchard_et_al_2009}; {cite.4.'Flament_and_Remy_2012}), and satellite radar interferometry ({cite.4.'Rignot_et_al_2008b}). The contribution to the total ice loss from these areas is, however, small and not well understood.
