index: hide
name: Classification and Taxonomy of Viruses

Although viruses are not classified in the three domains of life, their numbers are great enough to require classification. Since 1971, the  **International Union of Microbiological Societies** Virology Division has given the task of developing, refining, and maintaining a universal virus taxonomy to the  **International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV)**. Since viruses can mutate so quickly, it can be difficult to classify them into a genus and a species epithet using the binomial nomenclature system. Thus, the ICTV’s viral nomenclature system classifies viruses into families and genera based on viral genetics, chemistry, morphology, and mechanism of multiplication. To date, the ICTV has classified known viruses in seven orders, 96 families, and 350 genera. Viral family names end in - *viridae* (e.g,  *Parvoviridae*) and genus names end in  *−virus* (e.g.,  *Parvovirus*). The names of viral orders, families, and genera are all italicized. When referring to a viral species, we often use a genus and species epithet such as  *Pandoravirus dulcis* or  *Pandoravirus salinus.*

The  **Baltimore classification system** is an alternative to ICTV nomenclature. The Baltimore system classifies viruses according to their genomes (DNA or RNA, single versus double stranded, and mode of replication). This system thus creates seven groups of viruses that have common genetics and biology.

Aside from formal systems of nomenclature, viruses are often informally grouped into categories based on chemistry, morphology, or other characteristics they share in common. Categories may include naked or enveloped structure, single-stranded (ss) or double-stranded (ds) DNA or ss or ds RNA genomes, segmented or nonsegmented genomes, and positive-strand (+) or negative-strand (−) RNA. For example, herpes viruses can be classified as a dsDNA enveloped virus; human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is a +ssRNA enveloped virus, and tobacco mosaic virus is a +ssRNA virus. Other characteristics such as host specificity, tissue specificity, capsid shape, and special genes or enzymes may also be used to describe groups of similar viruses.  lists some of the most common viruses that are human pathogens by genome type.


****

|  **Genome** |  **Family** |  **Example Virus** |  **Clinical Features** |
|:-:|:-:|:-:|:-:|
| dsDNA, enveloped |  *Poxviridae* |  *Orthopoxvirus* | Skin papules, pustules, lesions |
|  *Poxviridae* |  *Parapoxvirus* | Skin lesions |
|  *Herpesviridae* |  *Simplexvirus* | Cold sores, genital herpes, sexually transmitted disease |
| dsDNA, naked |  *Adenoviridae* |  *Atadenovirus* | Respiratory infection (common cold) |
|  *Papillomaviridae* |  *Papillomavirus* | Genital warts, cervical, vulvar, or vaginal cancer |
|  *Reoviridae* |  *Reovirus* | Gastroenteritis severe diarrhea (stomach flu) |
| ssDNA, naked |  *Parvoviridae* |  *Adeno-associated dependoparvovirus A* | Respiratory tract infection |
|  *Parvoviridae* |  *Adeno-associated dependoparvovirus B* | Respiratory tract infection |
| dsRNA, naked |  *Reoviridae* |  *Rotavirus* | Gastroenteritis |
| +ssRNA, naked |  *Picornaviridae* |  *Enterovirus C* | Poliomyelitis |
|  *Picornaviridae* |  *Rhinovirus* | Upper respiratory tract infection (common cold) |
|  *Picornaviridae* |  *Hepatovirus* | Hepatitis |
| +ssRNA, enveloped |  *Togaviridae* |  *Alphavirus* | Encephalitis, hemorrhagic fever |
|  *Togaviridae* |  *Rubivirus* | Rubella |
|  *Retroviridae* |  *Lentivirus* | Acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) |
| −ssRNA, enveloped |  *Filoviridae* |  *Zaire Ebolavirus* | Hemorrhagic fever |
|  *Orthomyxoviridae* |  *Influenzavirus A, B, C* | Flu |
|  *Rhabdoviridae* |  *Lyssavirus* | Rabies |
    

## Classification of Viral Diseases

While the ICTV has been tasked with the biological classification of viruses, it has also played an important role in the classification of diseases caused by viruses. To facilitate the tracking of virus-related human diseases, the ICTV has created classifications that link to the  **International Classification of Diseases (ICD)**, the standard taxonomy of disease that is maintained and updated by the World Health Organization (WHO). The ICD assigns an alphanumeric code of up to six characters to every type of viral infection, as well as all other types of diseases, medical conditions, and causes of death. This ICD code is used in conjunction with two other coding systems (the Current Procedural Terminology, and the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System) to categorize patient conditions for treatment and insurance reimbursement.

For example, when a patient seeks treatment for a viral infection, ICD codes are routinely used by clinicians to order laboratory tests and prescribe treatments specific to the virus suspected of causing the illness. This ICD code is then used by medical laboratories to identify tests that must be performed to confirm the diagnosis. The ICD code is used by the health-care management system to verify that all treatments and laboratory work performed are appropriate for the given virus. Medical coders use ICD codes to assign the proper code for procedures performed, and medical billers, in turn, use this information to process claims for reimbursement by insurance companies. Vital-records keepers use ICD codes to record cause of death on death certificates, and epidemiologists used ICD codes to calculate morbidity and mortality statistics.
