index: hide
name: Viruses - Introduction

Despite their small size, which prevented them from being seen with light microscopes, the discovery of a filterable component smaller than a bacterium that causes  **tobacco mosaic disease** (TMD) dates back to 1892. At that time, Dmitri  **Ivanovski**, a Russian botanist, discovered the source of TMD by using a porcelain filtering device first invented by Charles  **Chamberland** and Louis  **Pasteur** in Paris in 1884. Porcelain  **Chamberland filters** have a pore size of 0.1 µm, which is small enough to remove all bacteria ≥0.2 µm from any liquids passed through the device. An extract obtained from TMD-infected tobacco plants was made to determine the cause of the disease. Initially, the source of the disease was thought to be bacterial. It was surprising to everyone when Ivanovski, using a Chamberland filter, found that the cause of TMD was not removed after passing the extract through the porcelain filter. So if a bacterium was not the cause of TMD, what could be causing the disease? Ivanovski concluded the cause of TMD must be an extremely small bacterium or bacterial spore. Other scientists, including Martinus  **Beijerinck**, continued investigating the cause of TMD. It was Beijerinck, in 1899, who eventually concluded the causative agent was not a bacterium but, instead, possibly a chemical, like a biological poison we would describe today as a toxin. As a result, the word  *virus*, Latin for poison, was used to describe the cause of TMD a few years after Ivanovski’s initial discovery. Even though he was not able to see the virus that caused TMD, and did not realize the cause was not a bacterium, Ivanovski is credited as the original discoverer of viruses and a founder of the field of virology.

Today, we can see viruses using electron microscopes ({'Figure_6_1_TMV Figure 6.1.TMV}) and we know much more about them. Viruses are distinct biological entities; however, their evolutionary origin is still a matter of speculation. In terms of taxonomy, they are not included in the tree of life because they are  **acellular** (not consisting of cells). In order to survive and reproduce, viruses must infect a cellular host, making them obligate intracellular parasites. The genome of a virus enters a host cell and directs the production of the viral components, proteins and nucleic acids, needed to form new virus particles called  **virion** **s**. New virions are made in the host cell by assembly of viral components. The new virions transport the viral genome to another host cell to carry out another round of infection.  summarizes the properties of viruses.


| Characteristics of Viruses |
|:-:|
| Infectious, acellular pathogens |
| Obligate intracellular parasites with host and cell-type specificity |
| DNA or RNA genome (never both) |
| Genome is surrounded by a protein capsid and, in some cases, a phospholipid membrane studded with viral glycoproteins |
| Lack genes for many products needed for successful reproduction, requiring exploitation of host-cell genomes to reproduce |
    


{image:'Figure_6_1_TMV}
        
