index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.6.6
title: 13.6.6 - Uncertainties and Sensitivity to Ocean/Climate Model Formulations and Parameterizations

Uncertainties of {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} are discussed in detail in {Chapters.9 Chapter 9}. Sea level is a property of the ocean connected to nearly all dynamical and thermodynamical processes over the full ocean column, from the surface fluxes to the ocean bottom. Although many of the processes are to first order correctly simulated in climate models, differences between models ({'Figure_13_24 Figure 13.24}) indicate that {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in simulated and projected {Glossary.*Steric steric} sea level (globally and regionally) remain poorly understood. Moreover, the spread in ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} efficiency among models is responsible for 50% of the spread in heat uptake ({cite.13.'Kuhlbrodt_and_Gregory_2012}). In addition, some processes are not part of the CMIP5 simulations, such as the dynamical response of the ocean to meltwater input or the {Glossary.*Glacial_isostatic_adjustment GIA}/rotational/gravitational processes associated with this ice mass loss. Stammer and Hüttemann (2008) showed that coupled climate models that do not include the effect of changes in atmospheric moisture content on sea level pressure will underestimate future regional atmospheric pressure loading effects by up to 2 cm. Other uncertainties result from GIA/rotational/gravitational effects as well as from uncertainties in air–sea fluxes.

{image:'Figure_13_24}

Improvements in the skill of a sea level {Glossary.*Projection projection} require (1) better parameterizations of unresolved physical processes, (2) improved numerical algorithms for such processes as temperature and salinity {Glossary.*Advection advection}, (3) refined grid {Glossary.*Resolution resolution} to better represent such features as boundary currents and mesoscale eddies, and (4) the elimination of obsolete assumptions that have a direct impact on sea level ({cite.13.'Griffies_and_Greatbatch_2012}). Among the many limiting approximations made in ocean models, the Boussinesq approximation has been found to only marginally impact regional patterns (i.e., deviations from global mean) when directly compared to non-Boussinesq simulations ({cite.13.'Losch_et_al_2004}), thus lending greater confidence in Boussinesq models for addressing questions of regional {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level change}. Furthermore, for global sea level, the now-standard a posteriori adjustment ({cite.13.'Greatbatch_1994}; {cite.13.'Griffies_and_Greatbatch_2012}) accurately incorporates the missing global steric effect. The representation of dense overflows can also affect sea level simulations, and is particularly problematic in many ocean models used for climate studies, with direct impacts on the simulated vertical patterns of ocean heat uptake ({cite.13.'Legg_et_al_2009}).

Coarse-resolution ocean–climate simulations require a {Glossary.*Parameterization parameterization} of mesoscale and smaller eddies, but the parameterizations as well as the details of their numerical implementations can greatly impact the simulation. As shown by {cite.13.'Hallberg_and_Gnanadesikan_2006 Hallberg and Gnanadesikan (2006)} and {cite.13.'Farneti_et_al_2010 Farneti et al. (2010)}, coarse-resolution climate models may be overestimating the Antarctic Circumpolar Current response to wind changes. Better implementations of eddy parameterizations reduce such biases ({cite.13.'Farneti_and_Gent_2011}; {cite.13.'Gent_and_Danabasoglu_2011}), and they form the basis for some, but not all, of the CMIP5 simulations. Moreover, {cite.13.'Vinogradov_and_Ponte_2011 Vinogradov and Ponte (2011)} suggested that as one considers regional sea level variability and its relevant dynamics and {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}, mesoscale ocean features become important factors on a sub-decadal time scale. {cite.13.'Suzuki_et_al_2005 Suzuki et al. (2005)} compared changes in mean dynamic sea level in 2080–2100 relative to 1980–2000 as obtained from a lowand a high-resolution ocean component of a coupled model and concluded that although changes are comparable between runs, the high-resolution model captures enhanced details owing to resolving ocean eddy dynamics.

Even with a perfect ocean model, skill in sea level {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} depends on skill of the coupled climate model in which errors impacting sea level may originate from non-ocean components. Furthermore, initialization is fundamental to the prediction problem, particularly for simulation of low-frequency {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} modes ({cite.13.'Meehl_et_al_2010}). Projections of land-ice melting and the resultant sea level rise patterns also have large uncertainties, with additional uncertainties arising from

GIA models such as the mantle viscosity structure. Each of the many uncertainties and errors results in considerable spread in the projected patterns of {Glossary.*Sea_level_change sea level change} ({'Figure_13_24 Figure 13.24}) ({cite.13.'Pardaens_et_al_2011a}; {cite.13.'Slangen_et_al_2012}). In addition to ocean–climate model formulations and parameterizations, uncertainty in {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} of sea level change may be associated with specified freshwater forcing. Whether or not an ocean model is coupled with an ice-sheet model, the forcing should distinguish between {Glossary.*Runoff runoff} and iceberg flux. {cite.13.'Martin_and_Adcroft_2010 Martin and Adcroft (2010)} reported the only attempt thus far to explicitly represent iceberg drift and melting in a fully coupled climate model.
