index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.7.1
title: 9.7.1 - Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity, Idealized Radiative Forcing, and Transient Climate Response in the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 Ensemble

Equilibrium {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} (ECS) is the equilibrium change in global and annual mean surface air temperature after doubling the atmospheric concentration of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} relative to pre-industrial levels. In the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, the range in {Glossary.*Equilibrium_climate_sensitivity equilibrium climate sensitivity} of the CMIP3 models was 2.1°C to 4.4°C, and the single largest contributor to this spread was differences among modelled cloud feedbacks. These assessments carry over to the CMIP5 {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} without any substantial change ({'Table_9_5 Table 9.5}).

{table:'Table_9_5}

The method of diagnosing climate sensitivity in CMIP5 differs fundamentally from the method employed in CMIP3 and assessed in the AR4 ({cite.9.'Randall_et_al_2007}). In CMIP3, an AGCM was coupled to a non-dynamic mixed-layer (slab) ocean model with prescribed ocean heat transport convergence. CO2 concentration was then instantaneously doubled, and the model was integrated to a new equilibrium with unchanged implied ocean heat transport. While computationally efficient, this method had the disadvantage of employing a different model from that used for the historical simulations and climate {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections}. However, in the few comparisons that were made, the resulting disagreement in ECS was less than about 10% ({cite.9.'Boer_and_Yu_2003}; {cite.9.'Williams_et_al_2008}; {cite.9.'Danabasoglu_and_Gent_2009}; Li et al., 2013a). In CMIP5, climate sensitivity is diagnosed directly from the {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCMs} following the approach of {cite.9.'Gregory_et_al_2004 Gregory et al. (2004)}. In this case the CO2 concentration is instantaneously quadrupled and kept constant for 150 years of simulation, and both equilibrium climate sensitivity and {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing RF} are diagnosed from a linear fit of perturbations in global mean {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} to the instantaneous radiative imbalance at the TOA.

The transient {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} (TCR) is the change in global and annual mean {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} from an experiment in which the CO2 concentration is increased by 1% yr–1, and calculated using the difference between the start of the experiment and a 20-year period centred on the time of CO2 doubling. TCR is smaller than ECS because ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} delays surface warming. TCR is linearly correlated with ECS in the CMIP5 ensemble ({'Figure_9_42 Figure 9.42}), although the relationship may be nonlinear outside the range spanned in {'Table_9_5 Table 9.5} ({cite.9.'Knutti_et_al_2005}).

{image:'Figure_9_42}

Based on the methods outlined above and explained in {Chapters.9.9_7.9_7_2 Section 9.7.2} below, {'Table_9_5 Table 9.5} shows effective {Glossary.*Effective_radiative_forcing ERF}, ECS, TCR and {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} strengths for the CMIP5 ensemble. The two estimates of ERF agree with each other to within 5% for six models (CanESM2, INM-CM4, IPSL-CM5A-LR, MIROC5, MPI-{Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESM}-LR and MPI-ESM-P), although the deviation exceeds 10% for four models (CCSM4, CSIRO-Mk3-6-0, HadGEM2-ES, and MRI-CGCM3) and is indicative of deviations from the basic assumptions underlying one or both ERF estimation methods. However, the mean difference of 0.3 W m–2 between the two methods for diagnosing ERF is only about half of the ensemble standard deviation of 0.5 W m–2, or 15% of the mean value for ERF by CO2 using fixed SSTs. ECS and TCR vary across the ensemble by a factor of approximately 2. The multi-model ensemble mean in ECS is 3.2°C, a value nearly identical to that for CMIP3, while the CMIP5 ensemble range is 2.1°C to 4.7°C, a spread which is also nearly indistinguishable from that for CMIP3. While every CMIP5 model whose heritage can be traced to CMIP3 shows some change in ECS, there is no discernible systematic tendency. This broad similarity between CMIP3 and CMIP5 and the good agreement between different methods where they were applied to the same atmospheric {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCM} indicate that the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty} in methodology is minor compared to the overall spread in ECS. The change in TCR from CMIP3 to CMIP5 is generally of the same sign but of smaller magnitude compared to the change in ECS. The relationship between ECS and an estimates derived from total feedbacks are discussed in {Chapters.9.9_7.9_7_2 Section 9.7.2}.

Although ECS can vary with {Glossary.*Global_mean_surface_temperature global mean surface temperature} owing to the temperature dependencies of the various feedbacks ({cite.9.'Colman_and_McAvaney_2009}; cf. {Chapters.9.9_7.9_7_2 Section 9.7.2}), {'Figure_9_42 Figure 9.42} shows no discernible correlation for the CMIP5 historical temperature ranges, a fact that suggests that ECS is less sensitive to errors in the current climate than to other sources of uncertainty.
