index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 10.8.1
title: 10.8.1 - Transient Climate Response

The {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} discussed for the first time estimates of the TCR. TCR was originally defined as the warming at the time of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} doubling (i.e., after 70 years) in a 1% yr–1 increasing CO2 experiment (see {cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b}), but like ECS, it can also be thought of as a generic property of the climate system that determines the global temperature response ΔT to any gradual increase in RF, ΔF, taking place over an approximately 70-year time scale, normalized by the ratio of the forcing change to the forcing due to doubling CO2, F2×CO2: TCR = F2×CO2 ΔT/ΔF ({cite.10.'Frame_et_al_2006}; {cite.10.'Gregory_and_Forster_2008}; {cite.10.'Held_et_al_2010}; {cite.10.'Otto_et_al_2013}). This generic definition of the TCR has also been called the ‘Transient Climate Sensitivity’ ({cite.10.'Held_et_al_2010}). TCR is related to ECS and the global {Topics.*Radiation_Budgets energy budget} as follows: ECS = F2×CO2/α, where α is the sensitivity parameter representing the net increase in energy flux to space per degree of warming given all feedbacks operating on these time scales. Hence, by conservation of energy, ECS = F2×CO2 ΔT/(ΔF – ΔQ), where ΔQ is the change in the rate of increase of climate system heat content in response to the forcing ΔF. On these time scales, deep ocean heat exchange affects the {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} response as if it were an enhanced radiative damping, introducing a slow, or ‘recalcitrant’, component of the response which would not be reversed for many decades even if it were possible to return RF to pre-industrial values ({cite.10.'Held_et_al_2010}): hence the difficulty of placing an upper bound on ECS from observed surface warming alone ({cite.10.'Forest_et_al_2002}; {cite.10.'Frame_et_al_2006}). Because ΔQ is always positive at the end of a period of increasing forcing, before the climate system has re-equilibrated, TCR is always less than ECS, and since ΔQ is uncertain, TCR is generally better constrained by observations of recent climate change than ECS.

Because TCR focuses on the short and medium-term response, constraining TCR with observations is a key step in narrowing estimates of future global temperature change in the relatively short term and under {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} where forcing continues to increase or peaks and declines ({cite.10.'Frame_et_al_2006}). After stabilization, the ECS eventually becomes the relevant climate system property. Based on observational constraints alone, the AR4 concluded that TCR is very likely to be larger than 1°C and very unlikely to be greater than 3.5°C ({cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b}). This supported the overall assessment that the transient {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} is very unlikely greater than 3°C and very likely greater than 1°C ({cite.10.'Meehl_et_al_2007a}). New estimates of the TCR are now available.

Scaling factors derived from {Glossary.*Detection_and_Attribution detection} and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution studies} (see {Chapters.10.10_2 Section 10.2}) express how model responses to {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} and aerosols need to be scaled to match the observations over the historical period. These scaled responses were used in AR4 to provide probabilistic {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of both TCR and future changes in global temperature in response to these forcings under various scenarios ({cite.10.'Allen_et_al_2000}; {cite.10.'Stott_and_Kettleborough_2002}; {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2006}, 2008b; {cite.10.'Kettleborough_et_al_2007}; {cite.10.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}; {cite.10.'Stott_and_Forest_2007}). {cite.10.'Allen_et_al_2000 Allen et al. (2000)}, {cite.10.'Frame_et_al_2006 Frame et al. (2006)} and {cite.10.'Kettleborough_et_al_2007 Kettleborough et al. (2007)} demonstrate a near linear relationship between 20th century warming, TCR and warming by the mid-21st century as parameters are varied in Energy Balance Models, justifying this approach. Forster et al. (2013 ) show how the ratio ΔT/ ΔF does depend on the forcing history, with very rapid increases in forcing giving lower values: hence any inference from past attributable warming to future warming or TCR depends on a model (which may be simple or complex, but ideally physically based) to relate these quantities. Such inferences also depend on forcing estimates and projections. Recent revisions to RF (see {Chapters.8 Chapter 8}) suggest higher net {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing anthropogenic forcing} over the 20th century, and hence a smaller estimated TCR. {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2008b Stott et al. (2008b)} demonstrated that optimal detection analysis of 20th century temperature changes (using HadCM3) are able to exclude the very high and low temperature responses to {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} forcing. Consequently, projected 21st century warming may be more closely constrained than if the full range of aerosol forcings is used ({cite.10.'Andreae_et_al_2005}). {cite.10.'Stott_and_Forest_2007 Stott and Forest (2007)} demonstrate that projections obtained from such an approach are similar to those obtained by constraining {Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMIC} parameters from observations. {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2011 Stott et al. (2011)}, using HadGEM2-ES, and {cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2012 Gillett et al. (2012)}, using CanESM2, both show that the inclusion of observations between 2000 and 2010 in such an analysis reduces the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in projected warming in the 21st century, and tends to constrain the maximum projected warming to below that projected using data to 2000 only (Stott et al, 2006). Such an improvement is consistent with prior expectations of how additional data will narrow uncertainties ({cite.10.'Stott_and_Kettleborough_2002}).

TCR estimates have been derived using a variety of methods ({'Figure_10_20 Figure 10.20}a). {cite.10.'Knutti_and_Tomassini_2008 Knutti and Tomassini (2008)} compare EMIC simulations with 20th century surface and ocean temperatures to derive a {Glossary.*Probability_Density_Function probability density function} for TCR skewed slightly towards lower values with a 5 to 95% range of 1.1°C to 2.3°C. {cite.10.'Libardoni_and_Forest_2011 Libardoni and Forest (2011)} take a similar approach with a different EMIC and include atmospheric data and, under a variety of assumptions, obtain 5 to 95% ranges for TCR spanning 0.9°C to 2.4°C. Updating this study to include data to 2004 gives results that are essentially unchanged. Using a single model and observations from 1851 to 2010 {cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2012 Gillett et al. (2012)} derive a 5 to 95% range of 1.3°C to 1.8°C and using a single model, but using multiple sets of observations and analysis periods ending in 2010 and beginning in 1910 or earlier, {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2011 Stott et al. (2011)} derive 5 to 95% ranges that were generally between 1°C and 3°C. Both {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2011 Stott et al. (2011)} and {cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2012 Gillett et al. (2012)} find that the inclusion of data between 2000 and 2010 helps to constrain the upper bound of TCR. {cite.10.'Gillett_et_al_2012 Gillett et al. (2012)} find that the inclusion of data prior to 1900 also helps to constrain TCR, though {cite.10.'Stott_et_al_2011 Stott et al. (2011)} do not. Gillett et al. (2013 ) account for a broader range of model and observational uncertainties, in particular addressing the {Glossary.*Efficacy efficacy} of non-CO2 gases, and find a range of 0.9°C to 2.3°C. Several of the estimates of TCR that were cited by {cite.10.'Hegerl_et_al_2007b Hegerl et al. (2007b)} may have underestimated non-CO2 efficacies relative to the more recent estimates in {cite.10.'Forster_et_al_2007 Forster et al. (2007)}. Because observationally constrained estimates of TCR are based on the ratio between past attributable warming and past forcing, this could account for a high bias in some of the inputs used for the AR4 TCR estimate.

{image:'Figure_10_20}

{cite.10.'Held_et_al_2010 Held et al. (2010)} show that a two-box model originally proposed by {cite.10.'Gregory_2000 Gregory (2000)}, distinguishing the ‘fast’ and ‘recalcitrant’ responses, fits both historical simulations and instantaneous doubled CO2 simulations of the GFDL coupled model CM2.1. The fast response has a relaxation time of 3 to 5 years, and the historical simulation is almost completely described by this fast component of warming. {cite.10.'Padilla_et_al_2011 Padilla et al. (2011)} use this simple model to derive an observationally constrained estimate of the TCR of 1.3°C to 2.6°C. {cite.10.'Schwartz_2012 Schwartz (2012)} uses this twotime scale formulation to obtain TCR estimates ranging from 0.9°C to 1.9°C, the lower values arising from higher estimates of forcing over the 20th century. {cite.10.'Otto_et_al_2013 Otto et al. (2013)} update the analysis of {cite.10.'Gregory_et_al_2002 Gregory et al. (2002)} and {cite.10.'Gregory_and_Forster_2008 Gregory and Forster (2008)} using forcing estimates from Forster et al. (2013 ) to obtain a 5 to 95% range for TCR of 0.9°C to 2.0°C comparing the decade 2000–2009 with the period 1860–1879.

They note, however, the danger of overinterpreting a single, possibly anomalous, decade, and report a larger TCR range of 0.7°C to 2.5°C replacing the 2000s with the 40 years 1970–2009.

{cite.10.'Tung_et_al_2008 Tung et al. (2008)} examine the response to the 11-year {Glossary.*Solar_11_year_cycle solar cycle} using discriminant analysis, and find a high range for TCR: >2.5°C to 3.6°C However, this estimate may be affected by different mechanisms by which solar forcing affects climate (see {Box_10_2 Box 10.2}). The authors attempt to minimize possible aliasing with the response to other forcings in the 20th century and with internal {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability}, although some influence by them cannot be ruled out.

{cite.10.'Rogelj_et_al_2012 Rogelj et al. (2012)} take a somewhat different approach, using a simple {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} to match the distribution of TCR to observational constraints and a consensus distribution of ECS (which will itself have been informed by recent climate change), following {cite.10.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009 Meinshausen et al. (2009)}. {cite.10.'Harris_et_al_2013 Harris et al. (2013)} estimate a distribution for TCR based on a large sample of emulated {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCM} equilibrium responses, constrained by multiannual mean observations of recent climate and adjusted to account for additional uncertainty associated with model structural deficiencies ({cite.10.'Sexton_et_al_2012}). The equilibrium responses are scaled by global temperature changes associated with the sampled model variants, reweighting the projections based on the {Glossary.*Likelihood likelihood} that they correctly replicate observed historical changes in {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature}, to predict the TCR distribution. Both of these studies represent a combination of {Topics.*Evidence_of_Change multiple lines of evidence}, although still strongly informed by recent observed climate change, and hence are assessed here for completeness.

Based on this evidence, including the new 21st century observations that were not yet available to AR4, we conclude that, on the basis of constraints provided by recent observed climate change, TCR is likely to lie in the range 1°C to 2.5°C and extremely unlikely to be greater than 3°C. This range for TCR is smaller than given at the time of AR4, due to the stronger observational constraints and the wider range of studies now available. Our greater confidence in excluding high values of TCR arises primarily from higher and more confident estimates of past forcing: estimates of TCR are not strongly dependent on observations of ocean heat {Glossary.*Uptake uptake}.
