index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 9.6.1.1
title: 9.6.1.1 - Regional-Scale Simulation by Atmosphere–Ocean General Circulation Models

A comparison of CMIP3 and CMIP5 seasonal cycles of temperature and precipitation for different regions ({'Figure_9_38 Figure 9.38}) shows that temperature is generally better simulated than precipitation in terms of the amplitude and phase of the seasonal cycle. The multi-model mean is closer to observations than most of the individual models. The systematic difference between the CMIP5 and CMIP3 ensembles is small in most regions, although there is evident improvement in South Asia (SAS) and Tropical South America (TSA) in the rainy seasons. In some cases the spread amongst observational estimates can be of comparable magnitude to the {Glossary.*Model_spread model spread}, e.g., winter in the Europe and Mediterranean (EUM) {Topics.*Regional_Climate region}.

{image:'Figure_9_38}

There are as yet rather few published studies in which regional behaviour of the CMIP5 models is evaluated in great detail. {cite.9.'Cattiaux_et_al_2013 Cattiaux et al. (2013)} obtained results for Europe similar to those discussed above. {cite.9.'Joetzjer_et_al_2013 Joetzjer et al. (2013)} considered 13 models that participated in both CMIP3 and in CMIP5 and found that the seasonal cycle of precipitation over the Amazon improved in the latter.

Based on the CMIP archives, regional biases in seasonal and annual mean temperature and precipitation are shown for several land regions in {'Figure_9_39 Figure 9.39}, and for polar and oceanic regions in {'Figure_9_40 Figure 9.40}. The CMIP5 median temperature biases range from about –3°C to 1.5°C. Substantial cold biases over NH regions are more prevalent in winter (December to February) than summer (June to August). The median biases appear in most cases slightly less negative for CMIP5 than CMIP3. The spread amongst models, as characterized by the 25 to 75% and 5 to 95% ranges, is slightly reduced from CMIP3 to CMIP5 in a majority of the regions and is roughly ±3oC. The RMS error of individual CMIP5 models is smaller than that for CMIP3 in 24 of the 26 regions in {'Figure_9_39 Figure 9.39} in DJF, JJA and the annual mean. The absolute value of the {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} mean bias has also been reduced in most cases. The inter-model spread remains large, particularly in high-latitude regions in winter and in regions with steep orography (such as CAS, SAS, TIB and WSA). The inter-model temperature spread has decreased from CMIP3 to CMIP5 over most of the oceans and over the Arctic and Antarctic land regions. The cold winter bias over the Arctic has been reduced. There is little systematic inter-ensemble difference in temperature over lower latitude oceans.

{image:'Figure_9_39}

{image:'Figure_9_40}

Biases in seasonal total precipitation are shown in the right column of Figures {'Figure_9_39 9.39} and {'Figure_9_40 9.40} for the NH winter (October to March) and summer (April to September) half years as well as the annual mean. The largest systematic biases over land regions occur in ALA, WSA and TIB, where the annual precipitation exceeds that observed in all CMIP5 models, with a median bias on the order of 100%. All these regions are characterized by high orography and / or a large fraction of solid precipitation, both of which are expected to introduce a negative bias in gauge-based precipitation ({cite.9.'Yang_and_Ohata_2001}; {cite.9.'Adam_et_al_2006}) that may amplify the model-observation discrepancy. A large negative relative bias in SAH occurs in October to March, but it is of negligible magnitude in absolute terms. In nearly all other seasonal and regional cases over land, the observational estimate falls within the range of the CMIP5 simulations. Compared with CMIP3, the CMIP5 median precipitation is slightly higher in most regions. In contrast with temperature, the seasonal and annual mean ensemble mean and the rootmean square precipitation biases are larger for CMIP5 than for CMIP3 in a slight majority of land regions ({'Figure_9_39 Figure 9.39}) and in most of the 14 other regions ({'Figure_9_40 Figure 9.40}). However, considering the observational {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainty}, the performance of the CMIP3 and CMIP5 ensembles is assessed to be broadly similar. The inter-model spreads are similar and typically largest in arid areas when expressed in relative terms.

Especially over the oceans and polar regions ({'Figure_9_40 Figure 9.40}), the scarcity of observations and their uncertainty complicates the evaluation of simulated precipitation. Of two commonly used data sets, CMAP indicates systematically more precipitation than GPCP over low-latitude oceans and less over many high-latitude regions ({cite.9.'Yin_et_al_2004}; {cite.9.'Shin_et_al_2011}). Over most low-latitude ocean regions, annual precipitation in most CMIP3 and CMIP5 models exceeds GPCP. The difference relative to CMAP is smaller although mostly of the same sign. In Arctic and Antarctic Ocean areas, simulated precipitation is much above CMAP, but more similar to GPCP. Over Antarctic land, precipitation in most models is below CMAP, but close to or above GPCP.

Continental to sub-continental mean values may not be representative for smaller-scale biases, as biases generally increase with decreasing spatial averaging ({cite.9.'Masson_and_Knutti_2011b}; {cite.9.'Raisanen_and_Ylhaisi_2011}). A typical order of magnitude for grid-box-scale annual mean biases in individual CMIP3 models was 2°C for temperature and 1 mm day–1 for precipitation ({cite.9.'Raisanen_2007}; {cite.9.'Masson_and_Knutti_2011b}), with some geographical variation. This has been noted also in studies on how much spatial averaging would be needed in order to filter out the most unreliable small-scale features (e.g., Räisänen and Ylhäisi, 2011). In order to reduce such errors while still retaining information on small scales, {cite.9.'Masson_and_Knutti_2011b Masson and Knutti (2011b)} found, depending on the variable and the region, that smoothing needed to vary from the gridpoint scale to around 2000 km.

On the whole, based on analysis of both ensemble means and inter-model spread, there is high confidence that the CMIP5 models simulate regional-scale temperature distributions somewhat better than the CMIP3 models did. This improvement is evident for most regions. For precipitation, there is medium confidence that there is no systematic change in model performance. In many regions, precipitation biases relative to CRU TS 3.10.01 and GPCP (and CMAP) are larger for CMIP5 than for CMIP3, but given observational uncertainty, the two ensembles are broadly similar.
