index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.3.3.1
title: 8.3.3.1 - Tropospheric Ozone

{Glossary.*Ozone Ozone} is formed in the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} by photochemical reactions of natural and {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} precursor species ({Chapters.8.8_2.8_2_3.8_2_3_1 Section 8.2.3.1}). Changes in ozone above the {Glossary.*Tropopause tropopause} due to {Topics.*Emissions emissions} of stratospheric ODSs can also affect ozone in the troposphere either by transport across the tropopause or modification of photolysis rates. Changes in climate have also affected tropospheric ozone concentrations (medium evidence, low agreement) through changes in chemistry, natural emissions and transport from the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} ({cite.8.'Isaksen_et_al_2009}).

The most recent estimates of tropospheric ozone RF come from multi-model studies under ACCMIP ({cite.8.'Conley_et_al_2013}; {cite.8.'Lamarque_et_al_2013}; {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2013}). The model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} reported only 1850–2000 RFs (0.34 W m–2) so the single-model results from {cite.8.'Skeie_et_al_2011a Skeie et al. (2011a)} were used to expand the timespan to 1750–2010, adding 0.04 W m–2, and 0.02 W m–2 to account for the periods 1750–1850 and 2000–2010 respectively. The best estimate of tropospheric ozone RF taking into account the ACCMIP models and the Søvde et al. (2011) results (the {cite.8.'Skeie_et_al_2011a Skeie et al. (2011a)} and {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2013a Shindell et al. (2013a)} models are included in ACCMIP) is 0.40 (0.20 to 0.60) W m–2. The quantifiable {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} come from the inter-{Glossary.*Model_spread model spread} (–0.11 to 0.11 W m–2) and the differences between radiative transfer models (–0.07 to 0.07 W m–2); all 5 to 95% confidence interval. Additional uncertainties arise from the lack of knowledge of pre-industrial emissions and the representation of chemical and physical processes beyond those included in the current models. The tropospheric ozone RF is sensitive to the assumed ‘pre-industrial’ levels. As described in {Chapters.8.8_2.8_2_3.8_2_3_1 Section 8.2.3.1}, very limited late 19th and early 20th century observations of surface ozone concentrations are lower than the ACCMIP models for the same period; however, we assess that those observations are very uncertain. {cite.8.'Skeie_et_al_2011a Skeie et al. (2011a)} and {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2013 Stevenson et al. (2013)} increase their uncertainty ranges to 30% for 1 standard deviation which is equivalent to (–50% to +50%) for the 5 to 95% confidence range and we adopt this for AR5. The overall confidence in the tropospheric ozone RF is assessed as high.

Because we have low confidence in the pre-industrial ozone observations, and these were extremely limited in spatial coverage, it is not possible to calculate a purely observationally based ozone RF. However, modern observations can be used to assess the performance of the chemistry models. {cite.8.'Bowman_et_al_2013 Bowman et al. (2013)} used satellite retrievals from the TES instrument to constrain the RF from the ACCMIP models. This reduced the inter-model uncertainty by 30%; however, we still maintain overall the (–50% to +50%) 5 to 95% confidence range for AR5.

The time evolution of the tropospheric ozone forcing is shown in {'Figure_8_7 Figure 8.7}. There is a noticeable acceleration in the forcing after 1950 and a deceleration in the 1990s reflecting the time evolution of anthropogenic precursor emissions. Observational evidence for trends in ozone concentrations is discussed in {Chapters.2.2_2.2_2_2.2_2_2_3 Section 2.2.2.3}.

{image:'Figure_8_7}

It can be useful to calculate a normalized {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing radiative forcing} (NRF) which is an RF per change in ozone column in W m–2 {Glossary.*Dobson_Unit DU}–1 or W mol–1. This is only an approximation as the NRF is sensitive to the vertical profile of the ozone change and to the latitudinal profile to a smaller extent. From {'Table_8_3 Table 8.3} we assess the NRF to be 0.042 (0.037 to 0.047) W m–2 DU–1 (94 (83 to 105) W mol–1) similar to the value of 0.042 W m–2 DU–1 (94 W mol–1) in {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} ({cite.8.'Ramaswamy_et_al_2001}).

A small number of studies have looked at attributing the ozone changes among the anthropogenically emitted species. Søvde et al. (2011) report a tropospheric ozone RF of 0.38 W m–2, 0.44 W m–2 from ozone {Glossary.*Precursors precursors} and –0.06 W m–2 from the impact of stratospheric ozone depletion on the troposphere. {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2013a Shindell et al. (2013a)} also calculate that ODSs are responsible for about –0.06 W m–2 of the tropospheric ozone RF, and ozone precursors for about 0.41 W m–2. Six of the models in {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2013 Stevenson et al. (2013)} and {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2009 Shindell et al. (2009)} performed experiments to attribute the ozone RF to the individual precursor emissions. An average of these seven model results leads to attributions of 0.24 ± 0.13 W m–2 due to CH emissions, 0.14 ± 0.09 W m–2 from NOx emissions, 0.07 ± 0.03 W m–2 from CO, and 0.04 ± 0.03W m–2 from non-methane {Glossary.*Volatile_Organic_Compounds volatile organic compounds} (NMVOCs). These results were calculated by reducing the precursor emissions individually from 2000 to pre-industrial levels. The results were scaled by the total ozone RFs {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to ozone precursors (0.50 W m–2) to give the contributions to the full 1750–2010 RF. Because of the {Glossary.*Nonlinearity nonlinearity} of the chemistry an alternative method of starting from pre-industrial conditions and increasing precursor emissions singly may give a different result. Note that as well as inducing an ozone RF, these ozone precursor species can also strongly affect the concentrations of {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} and aerosols, adding extra terms (both positive and negative) to their total indirect forcings. The contributions to the 1750–2010 CH4 RF are again based on {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2013 Stevenson et al. (2013)} and {cite.8.'Shindell_et_al_2009 Shindell et al. (2009)}. The {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2013 Stevenson et al. (2013)} values are for 1850–2000 rather than 1750 to 2011 so for these we distribute the CH4 RF for 1750–1850 and 2000–2011 (0.06 W m–2) by scaling the CH4 and CO contributions (assuming these were the most significant contributors over those time periods). This gives contributions of 0.58 ± 0.08, –0.29 ± 0.18, 0.07 ± 0.02 and 0.02 ± 0.02 W m–2 for changes from historical to present day emissions of CH4 (inferred emissions), NOX, CO and VOCs respectively (uncertainties are 5 to 95% confidence intervals). The difference between the total CH4 RF attributed to ozone precursors here (0.38 W m–2) and the value calculated from CH4 concentration changes in {'Table_8_2 Table 8.2} (0.48 W m–2) is due to nonlinearities in the CH4 chemistry because large single-step changes were used. To allow an easier comparison between the concentration-based and emission-based approaches in {Chapters.8.8_5.8_5_1 Section 8.5.1} the nonlinear term (+0.1 W m–2) is distributed between the four emitted species according to their absolute magnitude so that they total 0.48 W m–2. The scaled results still lie within the uncertainty bounds of the values quoted above. The impact of climate change over the historical period on CH4 oxidation is not accounted for in these calculations.

Tropospheric ozone can also affect the natural {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} of {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} by decreasing plant productivity (see Sections {Chapters.6.6_4.6_4_8.6_4_8_2 6.4.8.2} and {Chapters.8.8_2.8_2_3.8_2_3_1 8.2.3.1}) and it is found that this indirect effect could have contributed to the total CO2 RF ({Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_2.8_3_2_1 Section 8.3.2.1}; {cite.8.'Sitch_et_al_2007}), roughly doubling the overall RF attributed to ozone precursors. Although we assess there to be robust evidence of an effect, we make no assessment of the magnitude because of lack of further corroborating studies.
