index: hide
name: Classifications of Adaptive Immunity

All forms of adaptive immunity can be described as either active or passive.  **Active immunity** refers to the activation of an individual’s own adaptive immune defenses, whereas  **passive immunity** refers to the transfer of adaptive immune defenses from another individual or animal. Active and passive immunity can be further subdivided based on whether the protection is acquired naturally or artificially.

 **Natural active immunity** is adaptive immunity that develops after natural exposure to a pathogen ({'Figure_18_5_graph Figure 18.5.graph}). Examples would include the lifelong immunity that develops after recovery from a chickenpox or measles infection (although an acute infection is not always necessary to activate adaptive immunity). The length of time that an individual is protected can vary substantially depending upon the pathogen and antigens involved. For example, activation of adaptive immunity by protein spike structures during an intracellular viral infection can activate lifelong immunity, whereas activation by carbohydrate capsule antigens during an extracellular bacterial infection may activate shorter-term immunity.

 **Natural passive immunity** involves the natural passage of antibodies from a mother to her child before and after birth.  **IgG** is the only antibody class that can cross the  **placenta** from mother’s blood to the fetal blood supply. Placental transfer of IgG is an important passive immune defense for the infant, lasting up to six months after birth. Secretory IgA can also be transferred from mother to infant through  **breast milk**.

 **Artificial passive immunity** refers to the transfer of antibodies produced by a donor (human or animal) to another individual. This transfer of antibodies may be done as a prophylactic measure (i.e., to prevent disease after exposure to a pathogen) or as a strategy for treating an active infection. For example, artificial passive immunity is commonly used for post-exposure  **prophylaxis** against  **rabies**,  **hepatitis A,** **hepatitis B**, and  **chickenpox** (in high risk individuals). Active infections treated by artificial passive immunity include  **cytomegalovirus** infections in immunocompromised patients and  **Ebola virus** infections. In 1995, eight patients in the Democratic Republic of the Congo with active Ebola infections were treated with blood transfusions from patients who were recovering from Ebola. Only one of the eight patients died (a 12.5% mortality rate), which was much lower than the expected 80% mortality rate for Ebola in untreated patients. Artificial passive immunity is also used for the treatment of diseases caused by bacterial toxins, including  **tetanus**,  **botulism**, and  **diphtheria**.

Artificial active immunity is the foundation for  **vaccination**. It involves the activation of adaptive immunity through the deliberate exposure of an individual to weakened or inactivated pathogens, or preparations consisting of key pathogen antigens.


{image:'Figure_18_5_graph}
        

## Herd Immunity

The four kinds of immunity just described result from an individual’s adaptive immune system. For any given disease, an individual may be considered immune or susceptible depending on his or her ability to mount an effective immune response upon exposure. Thus, any given population is likely to have some individuals who are immune and other individuals who are susceptible. If a population has very few susceptible individuals, even those susceptible individuals will be protected by a phenomenon called  **herd immunity**. Herd immunity has nothing to do with an individual’s ability to mount an effective immune response; rather, it occurs because there are too few susceptible individuals in a population for the disease to spread effectively.

Vaccination programs create herd immunity by greatly reducing the number of susceptible individuals in a population. Even if some individuals in the population are not vaccinated, as long as a certain percentage is immune (either naturally or artificially), the few susceptible individuals are unlikely to be exposed to the pathogen. However, because new individuals are constantly entering populations (for example, through birth or relocation), vaccination programs are necessary to maintain herd immunity.
