index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.1
title: 4.1 - Introduction

The {Glossary.*Cryosphere cryosphere} is the collective term for the components of the {Topics.*Climate_System Earth system} that contain a substantial fraction of water in the frozen state ({'Table_4_1 Table 4.1}). The cryosphere comprises several components: snow, river and lake ice; {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice}; ice sheets, ice shelves, glaciers and ice caps; and {Glossary.*Frozen_ground frozen ground} which exist, both on land and beneath the oceans (see Glossary and {'Figure_4_1 Figure 4.1}). The lifespan of each component is very different. River and lake ice, for example, are transient features that generally do not survive from winter to summer; sea ice advances and retreats with the seasons but especially in the Arctic can survive to become multi-year ice lasting several years. The East Antarctic {Glossary.*Ice_sheet ice sheet}, on the other hand, is believed to have become relatively stable around 14 million years ago ({cite.4.'Barrett_2013}). Nevertheless, all components of the cryosphere are inherently sensitive to changes in air temperature and precipitation, and hence to a changing climate (see {Chapters.2 Chapter 2}).

{image:'Figure_4_1}

{table:'Table_4_1}

Changes in the longer-lived components of the cryosphere (e.g., glaciers) are the result of an integrated response to climate, and the cryosphere is often referred to as a ‘natural thermometer’. But as our understanding of the complexity of this response has grown, it is increasingly clear that elements of the cryosphere should rather be considered as a ‘natural climate-meter’, responsive not only to temperature but also to other climate variables (e.g., precipitation). However, it remains the case that the conspicuous and widespread nature of changes in the cryosphere (in particular, sea ice, glaciers and ice sheets) means these changes are frequently used emblems of the impact of changing climate. It is thus imperative that we understand the context of current change within the framework of past changes and natural variability.

The cryosphere is, however, not simply a passive indicator of climate change; changes in each component of the cryosphere have a significant and lasting impact on physical, biological and social systems. Ice sheets and glaciers exert a major control on global {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} (see Chapters {Chapters.5} and {Chapters.13}), ice loss from these systems may affect global ocean circulation and marine ecosystems, and the loss of glaciers near populated areas as well as changing seasonal snow cover may have direct impacts on water resources and tourism (see WGII Chapters 3 and 24). Similarly, reduced sea ice extent has altered, and in the future may continue to alter, ocean circulation, ocean productivity and {Topics.*Regional_Climate regional climate} and will have direct impacts on shipping and mineral and oil exploration (see WGII, Chapter 28). Furthermore, decline in snow cover and sea ice will tend to amplify regional warming through snow and ice-{Glossary.*Albedo albedo} {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} effects (see Glossary and {Chapters.9 Chapter 9}). In addition, changes in frozen ground (in particular, ice-rich {Glossary.*Permafrost permafrost}) will damage some vulnerable Arctic infrastructure (see WGII, Chapter 28), and could substantially alter the carbon budget through the release of methane (see {Chapters.6 Chapter 6}).

Since {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, substantial progress has been made in most types of cryospheric observations. Satellite technologies now permit estimates of regional and temporal changes in the volume and mass of the ice sheets. The longer time series now available enable more accurate assessments of trends and anomalies in sea ice cover and rapid identification of unusual events such as the dramatic decline of Arctic summer sea ice extent in 2007 and 2012. Similarly, Arctic sea ice thickness can now be estimated using satellite {Glossary.*Altimetry altimetry}, allowing pan-Arctic measurements of changes in volume and mass. A new global {Glossary.*Glacier glacier} inventory includes nearly all glaciers ({cite.4.'Arendt_et_al_2012}) (42% in AR4) and allows for much better estimates of the total ice volume and its past and future changes. Remote sensing measurements of regional glacier volume change are also now available widely and modelling of glacier mass change has improved considerably. Finally, fluctuations in the cryosphere in the distant and recent past have been mapped with increasing certainty, demonstrating the potential for rapid ice loss, compared to slow recovery, particularly when related to sea level rise.

This chapter describes the current state of the cryosphere and its individual components, with a focus on recent improvements in understanding of the observed variability, changes and trends. Projections of future cryospheric changes (e.g., {Chapters.13 Chapter 13}) and potential drivers ({Chapters.10 Chapter 10}) are discussed elsewhere. Earlier IPCC reports used cryospheric terms that have specific scientific meanings (see {cite.4.'Cogley_et_al_2011}), but have rather different meanings in everyday language. To avoid confusion, this chapter uses the term ‘glaciers’ for what was previously termed ‘glaciers and ice caps’ (e.g., {cite.4.'Lemke_et_al_2007}). For the two largest ice masses of continental size, those covering Greenland and Antarctica, we use the term ‘ice sheets’. For simplicity, we use units such as gigatonnes (Gt, 109 tonnes, or 1012 kg). One gigatonne is approximately equal to one cubic kilometre of freshwater (1.1 km3 of ice), and 362.5 Gt of ice removed from the land and immersed in the oceans will cause roughly 1 mm of global sea level rise ({cite.4.'Cogley_2012}).
