index: hide
name: Early Notions of Disease, Contagion, and Containment

Several ancient civilizations appear to have had some understanding that disease could be transmitted by things they could not see. This is especially evident in historical attempts to contain the spread of disease. For example, the Bible refers to the practice of quarantining people with leprosy and other diseases, suggesting that people understood that diseases could be communicable. Ironically, while leprosy is communicable, it is also a disease that progresses slowly. This means that people were likely quarantined after they had already spread the disease to others.

The ancient Greeks attributed disease to bad air,  *mal’aria*, which they called “miasmatic odors.” They developed hygiene practices that built on this idea. The Romans also believed in the  **miasma hypothesis** and created a complex sanitation infrastructure to deal with sewage. In Rome, they built aqueducts, which brought fresh water into the city, and a giant sewer, the  *Cloaca Maxima*, which carried waste away and into the river Tiber ({'Figure_1_1_cloaca Figure 1.1.cloaca}). Some researchers believe that this infrastructure helped protect the Romans from epidemics of waterborne illnesses.


{image:'Figure_1_1_cloaca}
        

Even before the invention of the microscope, some doctors, philosophers, and scientists made great strides in understanding the invisible forces—what we now know as microbes—that can cause infection, disease, and death.

The Greek physician  **Hippocrates** (460–370 BC) is considered the “father of Western medicine” ({'Figure_1_1_ancients Figure 1.1.ancients}). Unlike many of his ancestors and contemporaries, he dismissed the idea that disease was caused by supernatural forces. Instead, he posited that diseases had natural causes from within patients or their environments. Hippocrates and his heirs are believed to have written the  *Hippocratic Corpus*, a collection of texts that make up some of the oldest surviving medical books. Hippocrates is also often credited as the author of the Hippocratic Oath, taken by new physicians to pledge their dedication to diagnosing and treating patients without causing harm.

While Hippocrates is considered the father of Western medicine, the Greek philosopher and historian  **Thucydides** (460–395 BC) is considered the father of scientific history because he advocated for evidence-based analysis of cause-and-effect reasoning ({'Figure_1_1_ancients Figure 1.1.ancients}). Among his most important contributions are his observations regarding the Athenian plague that killed one-third of the population of Athens between 430 and 410 BC. Having survived the epidemic himself, Thucydides made the important observation that survivors did not get re-infected with the disease, even when taking care of actively sick people. This observation shows an early understanding of the concept of immunity.

Marcus Terentius  **Varro** (116–27 BC) was a prolific Roman writer who was one of the first people to propose the concept that things we cannot see (what we now call microorganisms) can cause disease ({'Figure_1_1_ancients Figure 1.1.ancients}). In  *Res Rusticae* ( *On Farming*), published in 36 BC, he said that “precautions must also be taken in neighborhood swamps

. . . because certain minute creatures [ *animalia minuta*] grow there which cannot be seen by the eye, which float in the air and enter the body through the mouth and nose and there cause serious diseases.”


{image:'Figure_1_1_ancients}
        
