index: hide
name: Healthcare-Associated (Nosocomial) Infections

Hospitals, retirement homes, and prisons attract the attention of epidemiologists because these settings are associated with increased incidence of certain diseases. Higher rates of transmission may be caused by characteristics of the environment itself, characteristics of the population, or both. Consequently, special efforts must be taken to limit the risks of infection in these settings.

Infections acquired in health-care facilities, including hospitals, are called  **nosocomial infections** or  **healthcare-associated infections (HAI)**. HAIs are often connected with surgery or other invasive procedures that provide the pathogen with access to the portal of infection. For an infection to be classified as an HAI, the patient must have been admitted to the health-care facility for a reason other than the infection. In these settings, patients suffering from primary disease are often afflicted with compromised immunity and are more susceptible to secondary infection and opportunistic pathogens.

In 2011, more than 720,000 HAIs occurred in hospitals in the United States, according to the CDC. About 22% of these HAIs occurred at a surgical site, and cases of  **pneumonia** accounted for another 22%;  **urinary tract infections** accounted for an additional 13%, and primary  **bloodstream infections** 10%. Such HAIs often occur when pathogens are introduced to patients’ bodies through contaminated surgical or medical equipment, such as  **catheters** and respiratory ventilators. Health-care facilities seek to limit nosocomial infections through training and hygiene protocols such as those described in <link:>.
