index: hide
name: Transmission

Regardless of the reservoir,  **transmission** must occur for an infection to spread. First, transmission from the reservoir to the individual must occur. Then, the individual must transmit the infectious agent to other susceptible individuals, either directly or indirectly. Pathogenic microorganisms employ diverse transmission mechanisms.

## Contact Transmission

 **Contact transmission** includes direct contact or indirect contact.  **Person-to-person transmission** is a form of  **direct contact transmission**. Here the agent is transmitted by physical contact between two individuals ({'Figure_16_3_contact Figure 16.3.contact}) through actions such as touching, kissing, sexual intercourse, or  **droplet sprays**. Direct contact can be categorized as vertical, horizontal, or droplet transmission.  **Vertical direct contact transmission** occurs when pathogens are transmitted from mother to child during pregnancy, birth, or breastfeeding. Other kinds of direct contact transmission are called  **horizontal direct contact transmission**. Often, contact between  **mucous membranes** is required for entry of the pathogen into the new host, although skin-to-skin contact can lead to mucous membrane contact if the new host subsequently touches a mucous membrane. Contact transmission may also be site-specific; for example, some diseases can be transmitted by sexual contact but not by other forms of contact.

When an individual coughs or sneezes, small droplets of mucus that may contain pathogens are ejected. This leads to direct  **droplet transmission**, which refers to droplet transmission of a pathogen to a new host over distances of one meter or less. A wide variety of diseases are transmitted by droplets, including  **influenza** and many forms of  **pneumonia**. Transmission over distances greater than one meter is called  **airborne transmission**.

 **Indirect contact transmission** involves inanimate objects called  **fomites** that become contaminated by pathogens from an infected individual or reservoir ({'Figure_16_3_indirect Figure 16.3.indirect}). For example, an individual with the common cold may sneeze, causing droplets to land on a fomite such as a tablecloth or carpet, or the individual may wipe her nose and then transfer mucus to a fomite such as a doorknob or towel. Transmission occurs indirectly when a new susceptible host later touches the fomite and transfers the contaminated material to a susceptible portal of entry. Fomites can also include objects used in clinical settings that are not properly sterilized, such as syringes, needles, catheters, and surgical equipment. Pathogens transmitted indirectly via such fomites are a major cause of healthcare-associated infections (see <link:>).


{image:'Figure_16_3_contact}
        


{image:'Figure_16_3_indirect}
        

## Vehicle Transmission

The term  **vehicle transmission** refers to the transmission of pathogens through vehicles such as water, food, and air. Water contamination through poor sanitation methods leads to  **waterborne transmission** of disease. Waterborne disease remains a serious problem in many regions throughout the world. The World Health Organization (WHO) estimates that contaminated drinking water is responsible for more than 500,000 deaths each year. Similarly, food contaminated through poor handling or storage can lead to  **foodborne transmission** of disease ({'Figure_16_3_food Figure 16.3.food}).

Dust and fine particles known as  **aerosols**, which can float in the air, can carry pathogens and facilitate the  **airborne transmission** of disease. For example, dust particles are the dominant mode of transmission of  **hantavirus** to humans. Hantavirus is found in mouse feces, urine, and saliva, but when these substances dry, they can disintegrate into fine particles that can become airborne when disturbed; inhalation of these particles can lead to a serious and sometimes fatal respiratory infection.

Although droplet transmission over short distances is considered contact transmission as discussed above, longer distance transmission of droplets through the air is considered vehicle transmission. Unlike larger particles that drop quickly out of the air column, fine mucus droplets produced by coughs or sneezes can remain suspended for long periods of time, traveling considerable distances. In certain conditions, droplets desiccate quickly to produce a  **droplet nucleus** that is capable of transmitting pathogens; air temperature and humidity can have an impact on effectiveness of airborne transmission.

Tuberculosis is often transmitted via airborne transmission when the causative agent,  *Mycobacterium tuberculosis*, is released in small particles with coughs. Because  **tuberculosis** requires as few as 10 microbes to initiate a new infection, patients with tuberculosis must be treated in rooms equipped with special ventilation, and anyone entering the room should wear a mask.


{image:'Figure_16_3_food}
        

## Vector Transmission

Diseases can also be transmitted by a mechanical or biological  **vector**, an animal (typically an  **arthropod**) that carries the disease from one host to another.  **Mechanical transmission** is facilitated by a  **mechanical vector**, an animal that carries a pathogen from one host to another without being infected itself. For example, a fly may land on fecal matter and later transmit bacteria from the feces to food that it lands on; a human eating the food may then become infected by the bacteria, resulting in a case of diarrhea or dysentery ({'Figure_16_3_vector Figure 16.3.vector}).

 **Biological transmission** occurs when the pathogen reproduces within a  **biological vector** that transmits the pathogen from one host to another ({'Figure_16_3_vector Figure 16.3.vector}). Arthropods are the main vectors responsible for biological transmission ({'Figure_16_3_VectorTab Figure 16.3.VectorTab}). Most arthropod vectors transmit the pathogen by biting the host, creating a wound that serves as a portal of entry. The pathogen may go through part of its reproductive cycle in the gut or salivary glands of the arthropod to facilitate its transmission through the bite. For example, hemipterans (called “kissing bugs” or “assassin bugs”) transmit  **Chagas disease** to humans by defecating when they bite, after which the human scratches or rubs the infected feces into a mucous membrane or break in the skin.

Biological insect vectors include  **mosquitoes**, which transmit  **malaria** and other diseases, and  **lice**, which transmit  **typhus**. Other arthropod vectors can include arachnids, primarily  **ticks**, which transmit  **Lyme disease** and other diseases, and  **mites**, which transmit  **scrub typhus** and  **rickettsial pox**. Biological transmission, because it involves survival and reproduction within a parasitized vector, complicates the biology of the pathogen and its transmission. There are also important non-arthropod vectors of disease, including mammals and birds. Various species of mammals can transmit  **rabies** to humans, usually by means of a bite that transmits the rabies virus. Chickens and other domestic poultry can transmit  **avian influenza** to humans through direct or indirect contact with  **avian influenza virus A** shed in the birds’ saliva, mucous, and feces.


{image:'Figure_16_3_vector}
        


{image:'Figure_16_3_VectorTab}
        
