index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.2.3.3
title: 8.2.3.3 - Methane

The surface {Glossary.*Mixing_ratio mixing ratio} of {Glossary.*Methane_CH4 CH4} has increased by 150% since pre-industrial times (Sections {Chapters.2.2_2.2_2_1.2_2_1_1.2_2_1_1_2 2.2.1.1.2} and {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_2.8_3_2_2 8.3.2.2}), with some {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} indicating a further doubling by 2100 ({'Figure_8_5 Figure 8.5}). Bottom-up estimates of present CH4 {Topics.*Emissions emissions} range from 542 to 852 TgCH4 yr–1 (see {'Table_6_8 Table 6.8}), while a recent top-down estimate with uncertainty analysis is 554 ± 56 TgCH4 yr–1 ({cite.8.'Prather_et_al_2012}). All quoted {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} in {Chapters.8.8_2.8_2_3.8_2_3_3 Section 8.2.3.3} are defined as 1-σ.

{image:'Figure_8_5}

The main {Glossary.*Sink sink} of CH4 is through its reaction with the hydroxyl radical (OH) in the {Glossary.*Troposphere troposphere} ({cite.8.'Ehhalt_and_Heidt_1973}). A primary {Glossary.*Source source} of tropospheric OH is initiated by the photodissociation of {Glossary.*Ozone ozone}, followed by reaction with water vapour (creating sensitivity to humidity, cloud cover and {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation}) ({cite.8.'Levy_1971}; {cite.8.'Crutzen_1973}). The other main source of OH is through secondary reactions ({cite.8.'Lelieveld_et_al_2008}), although some of those reactions are still poorly understood ({cite.8.'Paulot_et_al_2009}; {cite.8.'Peeters_et_al_2009}; {cite.8.'Taraborrelli_et_al_2012}). A recent estimate of the CH4 tropospheric chemical {Glossary.*Lifetime lifetime} with respect to OH constrained by methyl chloroform surface observations is 11.2 ± 1.3 years ({cite.8.'Prather_et_al_2012}). In addition, bacterial {Glossary.*Uptake uptake} in soils provides an additional small, less constrained loss ({cite.8.'Fung_et_al_1991}); estimated lifetime = 120 ± 24 years ({cite.8.'Prather_et_al_2012}), with another small loss in the {Glossary.*Stratosphere stratosphere} ({cite.8.'Ehhalt_and_Heidt_1973}); estimated lifetime = 150 ± 50 years ({cite.8.'Prather_et_al_2012}). Halogen chemistry in the troposphere also contributes to some tropospheric CH4 loss ({cite.8.'Allan_et_al_2007}), estimated lifetime = 200 ± 100 years ({cite.8.'Prather_et_al_2012}).

The ACCMIP estimate for present CH4 lifetime with respect to tropospheric OH varies quite widely (9.8 ± 1.6 years ({cite.8.'Voulgarakis_et_al_2013})), slightly shorter than the 10.2 ± 1.7 years in ({cite.8.'Fiore_et_al_2009 Fiore et al. (2009)}, but much shorter than the methyl chloroform-based estimate of 11.2 ± 1.3 years ({cite.8.'Prather_et_al_2012}). A partial explanation for the range in CH4 lifetime changes can be found in the degree of representation of chemistry in chemistry–{Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}. Indeed, {cite.8.'Archibald_et_al_2010 Archibald et al. (2010)} showed that the response of OH to increasing nitrogen oxides strongly depends on the treatment of hydrocarbon chemistry in a model. The impact on CH4 distribution in the ACCMIP simulations is, however, rather limited because most models prescribed CH4 as a time-varying lower-boundary mixing ratio ({cite.8.'Lamarque_et_al_2013}).

The chemical coupling between OH and CH4 leads to a significant amplification of an emission impact; that is, increasing CH4 emissions decreases tropospheric OH which in turn increases the CH4 lifetime and therefore its burden. The OH-lifetime sensitivity for CH4, s_OH = –δln(OH)/δln(CH4), was estimated in Chapter 4 of {cite.1.'IPCC_2001 TAR} to be 0.32, implying a 0.32% decrease in tropospheric mean OH (as weighted by CH4 loss) for a 1% increase in CH4. The {cite.8.'Fiore_et_al_2009 Fiore et al. (2009)} multi-model (12 models) study provides a slightly smaller value (0.28 ± 0.03). {cite.8.'Holmes_et_al_2013 Holmes et al. (2013)} gives a range 0.31 ± 0.04 by combining {cite.8.'Fiore_et_al_2009 Fiore et al. (2009)}, {cite.8.'Holmes_et_al_2011 Holmes et al. (2011)} and three new model results (0.36, 0.31, 0.27). Only two ACCMIP models reported values (0.19 and 0.26; {cite.8.'Voulgarakis_et_al_2013}). The projections of future CH4 in {Chapters.11 Chapter 11} use the {cite.8.'Holmes_et_al_2013 Holmes et al. (2013)} range and uncertainty, which at the 2-σ level covers all but one model result. The {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} factor f, the ratio of the lifetime of a CH4 perturbation to the lifetime of the total CH4 burden, is calculated as f = 1/(1-s). Other CH4 losses, which are relatively insensitive to CH4 burden, must be included so that f = 1.34 ± 0.06, (slightly larger but within the range of the {cite.8.'Stevenson_et_al_2006 Stevenson et al. (2006)} estimate of 1.29 ± 0.04, based on six models), leading to an overall perturbation lifetime of 12.4 ± 1.4 years, which is used in calculations of metrics in {Chapters.8.8_7 Section 8.7}. Additional details are provided in the Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.2.
