index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.4.9
title: 12.4.9 - Consistency and Main Differences Between Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 3/ Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 and Special Report on Emission Scenarios/ Representative Concentration Pathways

In the experiments collected under CMIP5, both models and scenario have changed with respect to CMIP3 making a comparison with earlier results and the scientific literature they generated (on which some of this chapter’s content is still based) complex. The set of models used in {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} (the CMIP3 models) have been superseded by the new CMIP5 models ({'Table_12_1 Table 12.1}; {Chapters.9 Chapter 9}) and the SRES {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios} have been replaced by four {Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs} ({Chapters.12.12_3.12_3_1 Section 12.3.1}). In addition, the baseline period used to compute anomalies has advanced 6 years, from 1980–1999 to 1986–2005.

It would be extremely costly computationally to rerun the full CMIP3 ensemble under the new RCPs and/or the full CMIP5 ensemble under the old {Glossary.*SRES_scenarios SRES scenarios} in order to separate model and scenario effects. In the absence of a direct comparison, we rely on simplified modelling frameworks to emulate CMIP3/5 SRES/RCP model behaviour and compare them. {'Figure_12_39 Figure 12.39} shows an emulation of the {Topics.*Surface_Temperature global mean temperature} response at the end of the 21st century that one would expect from the CMIP5 models if they were run under SRES A1B. In this case, anomalies are computed with respect to 1980–1999 for direct comparison with the values reported in AR4 ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}) which used that baseline. The method used to emulate the SRES A1B response of the CMIP5 is documented by Good et al. (2011a; 2013). {Glossary.*Ensemble Ensemble}-mean A1B RF was computed from CMIP3 {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} using the {cite.12.'Forster_and_Taylor_2006 Forster and Taylor (2006)} method, scaled to ensure consistency with the {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} required by the method. The simple model is only used to predict the temperature difference between A1B and {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5}, and between A1B and RCP4.5 separately for each model. These differences are then added to CMIP5 GCM simulations of RCP8.5 and RCP4.5 respectively, and averaged to give a single A1B estimate. The emulated CMIP5 SRES A1B results show a slightly larger mean response than the actual CMIP3 models, with a similar spread (±1 standard deviation is used in this case). The main reason for this is the slightly larger mean transient {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} (TCR) in the subset of CMIP5 models available in comparison with the AR4 CMIP3 models. An alternative emulation is presented by Knutti and Sedláček (2013) who use the simplified

{image:'Figure_12_39}

MAGICC models with parameters chosen to emulate the response of the CMIP3 models to RCP6.0 forcing, with anomalies expressed with respect to the 1986–2005 baseline period ({'Figure_12_39 Figure 12.39}). They too find a larger mean response in the CMIP5 case but also a larger spread (±1 standard deviation) in CMIP5. Uncertainties in the different approaches to emulating {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} simulations, for example estimating the non-GHG RF, and the small sample sizes of CMIP3 and CMIP5 make it difficult to draw conclusions on the statistical significance of the differences displayed in {'Figure_12_39 Figure 12.39}, but the same {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} lead us to conclude that on the basis of these analyses there appears to be no fundamental difference between the behaviour of the CMIP5 ensemble, in comparison with CMIP3.

Meinshausen et al. (2011a; 2011b) tuned MAGICC6 to emulate 19 {Glossary.*General_Circulation_Model GCMs} from CMIP3. The results are temperature projections and their uncertainties (based on the empirical distribution of the ensemble) under each of the RCPs, extended to year 2500 (under constant emissions for the lowest RCP and constant concentrations for the remaining three). In the same paper, an ensemble produced by combining {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} parameter calibration to nine C4MIP models with the 19 CMIP3 model parameter calibrations is also used to estimate the emissions implied by the various concentration pathways, had the CMIP3 models included a carbon cycle component. {cite.12.'Rogelj_et_al_2012 Rogelj et al. (2012)} used the same tool but performed a fully probabilistic analysis of the SRES and RCP scenarios using a parameter space that is consistent with CMIP3/C4MIP but a more general uncertainty characterization for key quantities like equilibrium {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity}, similarly to the approach utilized by {cite.12.'Meinshausen_et_al_2009 Meinshausen et al. (2009)}. Observational or other historical constraints are also used in this study and the analysis is consistent with the overall assessment of sources and ranges of uncertainties for relevant quantities ({Glossary.*Equilibrium_climate_sensitivity equilibrium climate sensitivity} above all) from AR4 ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b} , {Box_10_2 Box 10.2}). {'Figure_12_40 Figure 12.40} summarizes results of this probabilistic comparison for global temperature. The RCPs span a large range of stabilization, {Glossary.*Mitigation mitigation} and non-mitigation pathways and the resulting range of temperature changes are larger than those produced under SRES scenarios, which do not consider mitigation options. The SRES results span an interval between just above 1.0°C and 6.5°C when considering the respective likely ranges of all scenarios, including B1 as the lowest and A1FI as the highest. {Topics.*Emissions Emissions} under RCP8.5 are highest and the resulting temperature changes likely range from 4.0°C to 6.1°C by 2100. The lowest {Glossary.*RCP2_6 RCP2.6} assumes significant mitigation and the global temperature change likely remains below 2°C.

{image:'Figure_12_40}

Similar temperature change projections by the end of the 21st century are obtained under RCP8.5 and SRES A1FI, RCP6 and SRES B2 and RCP4.5 and SRES B1. There remain large differences though in the transient trajectories, with rates of change slower or faster for the different pairs. These differences can be traced back to the interplay of the (negative) short-term effect of sulphate aerosols and the (positive) effect of long-lived {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs}. Impact studies may be sensitive to the differences in these temporal profiles so care should be taken in approximating SRES with RCPs and vice versa.

While simple models can separate the effect of the scenarios and the model response, no studies are currently available that allow an {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attribution} of the CMIP3-CMIP5 differences to changes in the transient climate response, the carbon cycle, and the inclusion of new processes (chemistry, land surface, vegetation). The fact that these sets of CMIP3 and CMIP5 experiments do not include emission-driven runs would suggest that differences in the representation of the carbon cycle are very unlikely to explain differences in the simulations, since the only effect of changes in the carbon cycle representation would affect the land surface, and thus would have only a minor effect on the climate response at the global scale.

{'Figure_12_41 Figure 12.41} shows a comparison of the patterns of warming and precipitation change from CMIP3 (using 23 models and three SRES scenarios) and CMIP5 (using 46 models and four RCPs), utilizing the pattern scaling methodology ({Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_2 Section 12.4.2}). The geographic patterns of mean change are very similar across the two ensembles of models, with pattern correlations of 0.98 for temperature and 0.90 for precipitation changes. However there exist significant differences in the absolute values of the patterns, if not in their geographic shapes. A simple bootstrapping exercise that pooled together all models and scenarios and resampled 500 times the same numbers of models/scenarios divided into two groups, but without distinguishing CMIP3 from CMIP5 (and thus SRES from RCPs) allows to compute a measure of significance of the actual differences in the patterns. Stippling in {'Figure_12_41 Figure 12.41} marks the large regions where the difference is significant for temperature and precipitation patterns. The temperature pattern from CMIP5 shows significantly larger warming per degree Celsius of global mean temperature change in the NH and less warming per degree Celsius in the SH compared to the corresponding pattern from CMIP3. For precipitation patterns, CMIP5 shows significantly larger increases per degree Celsius in the NH and significantly larger decreases per degree Celsius in the SH compared to CMIP3. Even in this case we do not have studies that allow tracing the {Glossary.*Source source} of these differences to specific changes in models’ configurations, processes represented or scenarios run.

{image:'Figure_12_41}

{image:'Figure_12_42}

Knutti and Sedláček (2013) attempt to identify or rule out at least some of these sources. Differences in model projections spread or its counterpart, robustness, between CMIP3 and CMIP5 are discussed, and it is shown that by comparing the behaviour of only a subset of 11 models, contributed to the two CMIPs by the same group of institutions, the robustness of CMIP5 versus that of CMIP3 actually decreases slightly. This would suggest that the enhanced robustness of CMIP5 is not clearly attributable to advances in modelling, and may be a result of the fact that the CMIP5 ensemble contains different versions of the same model that are counted as independent in this measure of robustness.

A comparison of CMIP3 and CMIP5 results for extreme indices is provided in {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_3.12_4_3_3 Section 12.4.3.3} and {'Figure_12_13 Figure 12.13} for {Topics.*Extreme_Events temperature extremes}, and {Chapters.12.12_4.12_4_5.12_4_5_5 Section 12.4.5.5} and {'Figure_12_26 Figure 12.26} for extremes in the {Glossary.*Water_cycle water cycle}.
