index: hide
public: ar5-Box-14.1
name: Box 14.1
title: Box 14.1 - Conceptual Definitions and Impacts of Modes of Climate Variability

This box briefly defines key concepts used to interpret modes of variability (below) and summarizes regional impacts associated with well-known modes ({Box_14_1 Box 14.1}, {'Box_14_1_Table_1 Table 1} and {Box_14_1 Box 14.1}, {'Box_14_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}). The terms below are used to describe variations in time series variables reported at a set of geographically fixed spatial locations, for example, a set of observing stations or model grid points (based on the more complete statistical and dynamical interpretation in {cite.14.'Stephenson_et_al_2004 Stephenson et al. (2004)}).

### Climate indices

Time series constructed from climate variables that provides an aggregate summary of the state of the climate system. For example, the difference between {Topics.*Sea_Level sea level} pressure in Iceland and the Azores provides a simple yet useful historical {Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation NAO} index (see {Chapters.14.14_5 Section 14.5} and {Box_2_5 Box 2.5} for definitions of this and other well-known observational indices). Because of their maximum variance properties, climate indices are often defined using principal components.

### Principal component

A linear combination of a set of time series variables that has maximum variance subject to certain normalization constraints. Principal components are widely used to define optimal climate indices from gridded datasets (e.g., the Arctic Oscillation (AO) index, defined as the leading principal component of NH sea level pressure; {Chapters.14.14_5 Section 14.5}).

### {Glossary.*Climate_pattern Climate pattern}

A set of coefficients obtained by ‘{Topics.*Climate_Projections projection}’ (regression) of climate variables at different spatial locations onto a {Glossary.*Climate_index climate index} time series.

### Empirical Orthogonal Function

The climate pattern obtained if the climate index is a principal component. It is an eigenvector of the covariance matrix of gridded climate data.

### {Glossary.*Teleconnection Teleconnection}

A statistical association between climate variables at widely separated, geographically fixed spatial locations. Teleconnections are caused by large spatial structures such as basin-wide coupled modes of ocean–{Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} variability, Rossby wave-trains, mid-latitude jets and storm-tracks, etc.

### {Glossary.*Teleconnection_pattern Teleconnection pattern}

A correlation map obtained by calculating the correlation between variables at different spatial locations and a climate index. It is the special case of a climate pattern obtained for standardized variables and a standardized climate index, that is, the variables and index are each centred and scaled to have zero mean and unit variance. One-point teleconnection maps are made by choosing a variable at one of the locations to be the climate index.

{table:'Box_14_1_Table_1}

### Mode of {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability}

Underlying space–time structure with preferred spatial pattern and temporal variation that helps account for the gross features in variance and for teleconnections. A mode of variability is often considered to be the product of a spatial climate pattern and an associated climate index time series.

### {Glossary.*Climate_regime Climate regime}

A set of similar states of the climate system that occur more frequently than nearby states due to either more persistence or more often recurrence. In other words, a cluster in climate state space associated with a local maximum in the {Glossary.*Probability_Density_Function probability density function}.

{image:'Box_14_1_Figure_1}
