index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-14.1
name: FAQ 14.1
title: FAQ 14.1 - How is Climate Change Affecting Monsoons?

Monsoons are the most important mode of seasonal climate variation in the tropics, and are responsible for a large fraction of the annual rainfall in many regions. Their strength and timing is related to atmospheric moisture content, land–sea temperature contrast, land cover and use, atmospheric {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} loadings and other factors. Overall, monsoonal rainfall is projected to become more intense in future, and to affect larger areas, because atmospheric moisture content increases with temperature. However, the localized effects of climate change on regional monsoon strength and variability are complex and more uncertain.

{Glossary.*Monsoon Monsoon} rains fall over all tropical continents: Asia, Australia, the Americas and Africa. The monsoon circulation is driven by the difference in temperature between land and sea, which varies seasonally with the distribution of solar heating. The duration and amount of rainfall depends on the moisture content of the air, and on the configuration and strength of the atmospheric circulation. The regional distribution of land and ocean also plays a role, as does topography. For example, the Tibetan Plateau—through variations in its snow cover and surface heating—modulates the strength of the complex Asian monsoon systems. Where moist on-shore winds rise over mountains, as they do in southwest India, monsoon rainfall is intensified. On the lee side of such mountains, it lessens.

Since the late 1970s, the East Asian summer monsoon has been weakening and not extending as far north as it used to in earlier times , as a result of changes in the atmospheric circulation. That in turn has led to increasing {Glossary.*Drought drought} in northern China, but floods in the Yangtze River Valley farther south. In contrast, the Indo-Australian and Western Pacific monsoon systems show no coherent trends since the mid-20th century, but are strongly modulated by the El Niño-{Glossary.*Southern_Oscillation Southern Oscillation} ({Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO}). Similarly, changes observed in the South American monsoon system over the last few decades are strongly related to ENSO variability. Evidence of trends in the North American monsoon system is limited, but a tendency towards heavier rainfalls on the northern side of the main monsoon {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} has been observed. No systematic long-term trends have been observed in the behaviour of the Indian or the African monsoons.

{image:'FAQ_14_1_Figure_1}

The land surface warms more rapidly than the ocean surface, so that {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} contrast is increasing in most regions. The tropical atmospheric overturning circulation, however, slows down on average as the climate warms due to {Glossary.*Energy_balance energy balance} constraints in the tropical {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}. These changes in the atmospheric circulation lead to regional changes in monsoon intensity, area and timing. There are a number of other effects as to how climate change can influence monsoons. Surface heating varies with the intensity of {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation} absorption, which is itself affected by any land use changes that alter the reflectivity ({Glossary.*Albedo albedo}) of the land surface. Also, changing atmospheric aerosol loadings, such as air pollution, affect how much solar radiation reaches the ground, which can change the monsoon circulation by altering summer solar heating of the land surface. Absorption of solar radiation by aerosols, on the other hand, warms the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}, changing the atmospheric heating distribution.

The strongest effect of climate change on the monsoons is the increase in atmospheric moisture associated with warming of the atmosphere, resulting in an increase in total monsoon rainfall even if the strength of the monsoon circulation weakens or does not change.

Climate model {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} through the 21st century show an increase in total monsoon rainfall, largely due to increasing atmospheric moisture content. The total surface area affected by the monsoons is projected to increase, along with the general poleward expansion of the tropical regions. {Topics.*Climate_Modelling Climate models} project from 5% to an approximately 15% increase of global monsoon rainfall depending on {Topics.*Scenarios scenarios}. Though total tropical monsoon rainfall increases, some areas will receive less monsoon rainfall, due to weakening tropical wind circulations. Monsoon onset dates are likely to be early or not to change much and the monsoon retreat dates are likely to delay, resulting in lengthening of the monsoon season.

Future regional trends in monsoon intensity and timing remain uncertain in many parts of the world. Year-to-year variations in the monsoons in many tropical regions are affected by ENSO. How ENSO will change in future—and how its effects on monsoon will change—also remain uncertain. However, the projected overall increase in monsoon rainfall indicates a corresponding increase in the risk of extreme rain events in most regions.
