index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-14.2
name: FAQ 14.2
title: FAQ 14.2 - How Are Future Projections in Regional Climate Related to Projections of Global Means?

The relationship between regional climate change and global mean change is complex. {Topics.*Regional_Climate Regional climates} vary strongly with location and so respond differently to changes in global-scale influences. The global mean change is, in effect, a convenient summary of many diverse regional climate responses.

Heat and moisture, and changes in them, are not evenly distributed across the globe for several reasons:

- External {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} vary spatially (e.g., {Glossary.*Solar_radiation solar radiation} depends on latitude, {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} {Topics.*Emissions emissions} have local sources, land use changes regionally, etc.).
- Surface conditions vary spatially, for example, land/sea contrast, topography, sea {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperatures}, {Glossary.*Soil_moisture soil moisture} content.
- Weather systems and ocean currents redistribute heat and moisture from one region to another.

Weather systems are associated with regionally important climate phenomena such as monsoons, tropical convergence zones, {Glossary.*Storm_tracks storm tracks} and important modes of {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} (e.g., El Niño-{Glossary.*Southern_Oscillation Southern Oscillation} ({Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO}), North Atlantic Oscillation ({Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation NAO}), Southern Annular Mode ({Glossary.*Southern_Annular_Mode SAM}), etc.). In addition to modulating regional warming, some climate phenomena are also {Topics.*Climate_Projections projected} to change in the future, which can lead to further impacts on regional climates (see {'Table_14_3 Table 14.3}).

Projections of change in {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature} and precipitation show large regional variations ({FAQ_14_2 FAQ 14.2}, {'FAQ_14_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}). Enhanced surface warming is projected to occur over the high-latitude continental regions and the Arctic ocean, while over other oceans and lower latitudes changes are closer to the global mean ({FAQ_14_2 FAQ 14.2}, {'FAQ_14_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}a). For example, warming near the Great Lakes area of North America is projected to be about 50% greater than that of the global mean warming. Similar large regional variations are also seen in the projected changes of more extreme temperatures ({FAQ_14_2 FAQ 14.2}, {'FAQ_14_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}b). Projected changes in precipitation are even more regionally variable than changes in temperature ({FAQ_14_2 FAQ 14.2}, {'FAQ_14_2_Figure_1 Figure 1}c, d), caused by modulation from climate phenomena such as the monsoons and tropical convergence zones. Near-equatorial latitudes are projected to have increased mean precipitation, while regions on the poleward edges of the subtropics are projected to have reduced mean precipitation. Higher latitude regions are projected to have increased mean precipitation and in particular more extreme precipitation from extratropical cyclones.

{image:'FAQ_14_2_Figure_1}

Polar regions illustrate the complexity of processes involved in regional climate change. Arctic warming is projected to increase more than the global mean, mostly because the melting of ice and snow produces a regional {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} by allowing more heat from the Sun to be absorbed. This gives rise to further warming, which encourages more melting of ice and snow. However, the projected warming over the Antarctic continent and surrounding oceans is less marked in part due to a stronger positive {Glossary.*Trend trend} in the Southern Annular Mode. Westerly winds over the midlatitude southern oceans have increased over recent decades, driven by the combined effect of loss of stratospheric {Glossary.*Ozone ozone} over Antarctica, and changes in the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere}’s temperature structure related to increased {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} concentrations. This change in the Southern Annular Mode is well captured by {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} and has the effect of reducing atmospheric heat transport to the Antarctic continent. Nevertheless, the Antarctic Peninsula is still warming rapidly, because it extends far enough northwards to be influenced by the warm air masses of the westerly wind belt.
