index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 12.1
title: 12.1 - Introduction

{Topics.*Climate_Projections Projections of future climate} change are not like weather forecasts. It is not possible to make deterministic, definitive {Topics.*Climate_Predictions predictions} of how climate will evolve over the next century and beyond as it is with shortterm weather forecasts. It is not even possible to make projections of the frequency of occurrence of all possible outcomes in the way that it might be possible with a calibrated probabilistic medium-range weather forecast. Projections of climate change are uncertain, first because they are dependent primarily on scenarios of future {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} and natural {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcings} that are uncertain, second because of incomplete understanding and imprecise models of the climate system and finally because of the existence of internal {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability}. The term climate {Glossary.*Projection projection} tacitly implies these {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} and dependencies. Nevertheless, as greenhouse gas (GHG) concentrations continue to rise, we expect to see future changes to the climate system that are greater than those already observed and {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to {Topics.*Human_Influence human activities}. It is possible to understand future climate change using models and to use models to characterize outcomes and uncertainties under specific assumptions about future forcing scenarios.

This chapter assesses climate projections on time scales beyond those covered in {Chapters.11 Chapter 11}, that is, beyond the mid-21st century. Information from a range of different modelling tools is used here; from simple {Glossary.*Energy_Balance_Model energy balance models}, through {Topics.*Climate_System Earth System} Models of Intermediate Complexity ({Glossary.*Earth_System_Model_of_Intermediate_Complexity EMICs}) to complex dynamical climate and Earth System Models ({Glossary.*Earth_System_Model ESMs}). These tools are evaluated in {Chapters.9 Chapter 9} and, where possible, the evaluation is used in assessing the validity of the projections. This chapter also summarizes some of the information on leading-order measures of the sensitivity of the climate system from other chapters and discusses the relevance of these measures for climate projections, commitments and {Glossary.*Irreversibility irreversibility}.

Since the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4} ({cite.12.'Meehl_et_al_2007b}) there have been a number of advances:

- New scenarios of future forcings have been developed to replace the Special Report on {Topics.*Emissions Emissions} {Topics.*Scenarios Scenarios} (SRES). The Representative Concentration Pathways ({Glossary.*Representative_Concentration_Pathways RCPs}, see {Chapters.12.12_3 Section 12.3}) ({cite.12.'Moss_et_al_2010}), have been designed to cover a wide range of possible magnitudes of climate change in models rather than being derived sequentially from storylines of socioeconomic futures. The aim is to provide a range of climate responses while individual socioeconomic scenarios may be derived, scaled and interpolated (some including explicit climate policy). Nevertheless, many studies that have been performed since AR4 have used SRES and, where appropriate, these are assessed. Simplified scenarios of future change, developed strictly for understanding the response of the climate system rather than to represent realistic future outcomes, are also synthesized and the understanding of leading-order measures of {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} such as the equilibrium {Glossary.*Climate_sensitivity climate sensitivity} (ECS) and the transient climate response (TCR) are assessed.
- New models have been developed with higher spatial {Glossary.*Resolution resolution}, with better representation of processes and with the inclusion of more processes, in particular processes that are important in simulating the {Topics.*Carbon_Cycle carbon cycle} of the Earth. In these models, emissions of {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas GHGs} may be specified and these gases may be chemically active in the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere} or be exchanged with pools in terrestrial and oceanic systems before ending up as an airborne concentration (see Figure 10.1 of AR4).
- New types of model experiments have been performed, many coordinated by the Coupled {Topics.*Model_Intercomparison Model Intercomparison} Project Phase 5 (CMIP5) ({cite.12.'Taylor_et_al_2012}), which exploit the addition of these new processes. Models may be driven by emissions of GHGs, or by their concentrations with different Earth System {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} loops cut. This allows the separate assessment of different feedbacks in the system and of projections of physical climate variables and future emissions.
- Techniques to assess and quantify uncertainties in projections have been further developed but a full probabilistic quantification remains difficult to propose for most quantities, the exception being global, temperature-related measures of the system sensitivity to forcings, such as ECS and TCR. In those few cases, projections are presented in the form of probability density functions (PDFs). We make the distinction between the spread of a multi-model {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble}, an ad hoc measure of the possible range of projections and the quantification of uncertainty that combines information from models and observations using statistical algorithms. Just like {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models}, different techniques for quantifying uncertainty exist and produce different outcomes. Where possible, different estimates of uncertainty are compared.

Although not an advance, as time has moved on, the baseline period from which climate change is expressed has also moved on (a common baseline period of 1986–2005 is used throughout, consistent with the 2006 start-point for the RCP scenarios). Hence climate change is expressed as a change with respect to a recent period of history, rather than a time before significant anthropogenic influence. It should be borne in mind that some anthropogenically forced climate change had already occurred by the 1986–2005 period (see {Chapters.10 Chapter 10}).

The focus of this chapter is on global and continental/ocean basin-scale features of climate. For many aspects of future climate change, it is possible to discuss generic features of projections and the processes that underpin them for such large scales. Where interesting or unique changes have been investigated at smaller scales, and there is a level of agreement between different studies of those smaller-scale changes, these may also be assessed in this chapter, although where changes are linked to climate phenomena such as El Niño, readers are referred to {Chapters.14 Chapter 14}. Projections of atmospheric composition, chemistry and air quality for the 21st century are assessed in {Chapters.11 Chapter 11}, except for {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2} which is assessed in this chapter. An innovation for AR5 is Annex I: Atlas of Global and Regional Climate Projections, a collection of global and regional maps of projected climate changes derived from model output. A detailed commentary on each of the maps presented in Annex I is not provided here, but some discussion of generic features is provided.

Projections from regional models driven by boundary conditions from global models are not extensively assessed but may be mentioned in this chapter. More detailed regional information may be found in {Chapters.14 Chapter 14} and is also now assessed in the Working Group II report, where it can more easily be linked to impacts.
