index: hide
public: ar5-FAQ-7.1
name: FAQ 7.1
title: FAQ 7.1 - How Do Clouds Affect Climate and Climate Change?

Clouds strongly affect the current climate, but observations alone cannot yet tell us how they will affect a future, warmer climate. Comprehensive {Topics.*Climate_Predictions prediction} of changes in cloudiness requires a global climate model. Such models simulate cloud fields that roughly resemble those observed, but important errors and {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} remain. Different {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate models} produce different {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of how clouds will change in a warmer climate. Based on all available evidence, it seems likely that the net cloud–climate {Glossary.*Feedback feedback} amplifies global warming. If so, the strength of this amplification remains uncertain.

Since the 1970s, scientists have recognized the critical importance of clouds for the climate system, and for climate change. Clouds affect the climate system in a variety of ways. They produce precipitation (rain and snow) that is necessary for most life on land. They warm the {Topics.*Climate_System atmosphere} as water vapour condenses. Although some of the condensed water re-evaporates, the precipitation that reaches the surface represents a net warming of the air. Clouds strongly affect the flows of both sunlight (warming the planet) and infrared light (cooling the planet as it is radiated to space) through the {Glossary.*Atmosphere atmosphere}. Finally, clouds contain powerful updraughts that can rapidly carry air from near the surface to great heights. The updraughts carry energy, moisture, momentum, trace gases, and {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol} particles. For decades, climate scientists have been using both observations and models to study how clouds change with the daily weather, with the seasonal cycle, and with year-to-year changes such as those associated with El Niño.

All cloud processes have the potential to change as the climate state changes. Cloud feedbacks are of intense interest in the context of climate change. Any change in a cloud process that is caused by climate change—and in turn influences climate—represents a cloud–{Glossary.*Climate_feedback climate feedback}. Because clouds interact so strongly with both sunlight and infrared light, small changes in cloudiness can have a potent effect on the climate system.

Many possible types of cloud–climate feedbacks have been suggested, involving changes in cloud amount, cloudtop height and/or cloud reflectivity (see {FAQ_7_1 FAQ 7.1}, {'FAQ_7_1_Figure_1 Figure 1}). The literature shows consistently that high clouds amplify global warming as they interact with infrared light emitted by the atmosphere and surface. There is more uncertainty, however, about the feedbacks associated with low-altitude clouds, and about cloud feedbacks associated with amount and reflectivity in general.

{image:'FAQ_7_1_Figure_1}

Thick high clouds efficiently reflect sunlight, and both thick and thin high clouds strongly reduce the amount of infrared light that the atmosphere and surface emit to space. The compensation between these two effects makes the {Topics.*Surface_Temperature surface temperature} somewhat less sensitive to changes in high cloud amount than to changes in low cloud amount. This compensation could be disturbed if there were a systematic shift from thick high cloud to thin cirrus cloud or vice versa; while this possibility cannot be ruled out, it is not currently supported by any evidence. On the other hand, changes in the altitude of high clouds (for a given high-cloud amount) can strongly affect {Glossary.*Surface_temperature surface temperature}. An upward shift in high clouds reduces the infrared light that the surface and atmosphere emit to space, but has little effect on the reflected sunlight. There is strong evidence of such a shift in a warmer climate. This amplifies global warming by preventing some of the additional infrared light emitted by the atmosphere and surface from leaving the climate system.

Low clouds reflect a lot of sunlight back to space but, for a given state of the atmosphere and surface, they have only a weak effect on the infrared light that is emitted to space by the Earth. As a result, they have a net cooling effect on the present climate; to a lesser extent, the same holds for mid-level clouds. In a future climate warmed by increasing greenhouse gases, most IPCC-assessed climate models simulate a decrease in low and mid-level cloud amount, which would increase the absorption of sunlight and so tend to increase the warming. The extent of this decrease is quite model-dependent, however.

There are also other ways that clouds may change in a warmer climate. Changes in wind patterns and {Glossary.*Storm_tracks storm tracks} could affect the regional and seasonal patterns of cloudiness and precipitation. Some studies suggest that the signal of one such {Glossary.*Trend trend} seen in climate models—a poleward migration of the clouds associated with mid-latitude storm tracks—is already detectable in the observational record. By shifting clouds into regions receiving less sunlight, this could also amplify global warming. More clouds may be made of liquid drops, which are small but numerous and reflect more sunlight back to space than a cloud composed of the same mass of larger ice crystals. Thin cirrus cloud, which exerts a net warming effect and is very hard for climate models to simulate, could change in ways not simulated by models although there is no evidence for this. Other processes may be regionally important, for example, interactions between clouds and the surface can change over the ocean where {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} melts, and over land where plant transpiration is reduced.

There is as yet no broadly accepted way to infer global cloud feedbacks from observations of long-term cloud trends or shorter-time scale variability. Nevertheless, all the models used for the current assessment (and the preceding two IPCC assessments) produce net cloud feedbacks that either enhance {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} greenhouse warming or have little overall effect. Feedbacks are not ‘put into’ the models, but emerge from the functioning of the clouds in the simulated atmosphere and their effects on the flows and transformations of energy in the climate system. The differences in the strengths of the cloud feedbacks produced by the various models largely account for the different sensitivities of the models to changes in {Glossary.*Greenhouse_gas greenhouse gas} concentrations.
