index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.2.2.3
title: 8.7.2.2.3 - Black carbon and organic carbon

Most of the {Glossary.*Metric metric} values for {Glossary.*Black_carbon BC} in the literature include the {Glossary.*Aerosol aerosol}–radiation interaction and the snow/ice {Glossary.*Albedo albedo} effect of BC, though whether external or internal mixing is used varies between the studies. {cite.8.'Bond_et_al_2011 Bond et al. (2011)} calculate GWPs and find that when the albedo effect is included the values increase by 5 to 15%. Studies have shown, however, that the {Glossary.*Climate_response climate response} per unit {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} to this mechanism is stronger than for {Topics.*The_Greenhouse_Effect WMGHG} (see {Chapters.7.7_5 Section 7.5}).

{cite.8.'Bond_et_al_2013 Bond et al. (2013)} assessed the current understanding of BC effects and calculated {Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP} and GTP for BC that includes {Glossary.*Aerosol_radiation_interaction aerosol–radiation interaction}, aerosol–cloud interactions and albedo. As shown in Table 8.A.6 the {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties} are wide for both metrics (for 90% uncertainty range) reflecting the current challenges related to understanding and quantifying the various effects (see Sections {Chapters.7.7_5 7.5}, {Chapters.8.8_3.8_3_4 8.3.4} and {Chapters.8.8_5.8_5_1 8.5.1}). Their aerosol–radiation interaction effect is about 65% of the total effect while the albedo effect is approximately 20% of the aerosol– radiation interaction effect. Based on two studies ({cite.8.'Rypdal_et_al_2009}; {cite.8.'Bond_et_al_2011}), the GWP and GTP metrics were found to vary with the {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} where BC is emitted by about ±30% . For larger regions of {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, {cite.8.'Collins_et_al_2013 Collins et al. (2013)} calculated GWPs and GTPs for the direct effect of BC and found somewhat lower variations among the regions.

Several studies have focused on the effects of emissions of BC and OC from different regions ({cite.8.'Bauer_et_al_2007}; {cite.8.'Koch_et_al_2007}; {cite.8.'Naik_et_al_2007}; {cite.8.'Reddy_and_Boucher_2007}; {cite.8.'Rypdal_et_al_2009}). However, examination of results from these models ({cite.8.'Fuglestvedt_et_al_2010}) reveals that there is not a robust relationship between the region of emission and the metric value — hence, regions that yield the highest metric value in one study, do not, in general, do so in the other studies.

The metric values for OC are quite consistent across studies, but fewer studies are available (see Table 8.A.6). A brief overview of metric values for other components is given in the Supplementary Material Section 8.SM.14.
