index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 4.5.1
title: 4.5.1 - Background

Snowfall is a component of total precipitation and, in that context, is discussed in {Chapters.2 Chapter 2} (See {Chapters.2.2_5.2_5_1.2_5_1_3 Section 2.5.1.3}); here we discuss accumulated snow as a climatological indicator. Snow is measured using a variety of instruments and techniques, and reported using several metrics, including {Glossary.*Snow_cover_extent snow cover extent} (SCE; see Glossary); the seasonal sum of daily snowfall; snow depth (SD); snow cover duration (SCD), that is, number of days with snow exceeding a threshold depth; or snow water equivalent ({Glossary.*Snow_water_equivalent SWE}; see Glossary).

Long-duration, consistent records of snow are rare owing to many challenges in making accurate and representative measurements. Although weather stations in snowy inhabited areas often report snow depth, records of snowfall are often patchy or use techniques that change over time (e.g., {cite.4.'Kunkel_et_al_2007}). The density of stations and the choice of {Glossary.*Metric metric} also varies considerably from country to country. The longest satellite-based record of SCE is the visible-wavelength weekly product of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) dating to 1966 ({cite.4.'Robinson_et_al_1993}), but this covers only the NH. Satellite mapping of snow depth and SWE has lower accuracy than SCE, especially in mountainous and heavily forested areas. Measurement challenges are particularly acute in the Southern Hemisphere (SH), where only about 11 long-duration in situ records continue to recent times: seven in the central Andes and four in southeast Australia. Owing to concerns about quality and duration, global satellite microwave retrievals of SWE are of less use in the data-rich NH than in the data-poor SH.
