index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 13.7.3
title: 13.7.3 - Projections of Ocean Waves

Changes in ocean wave conditions are determined by changes in the major wind systems, especially in the main areas affected by tropical and extra-tropical storms. Based on in situ and satellite altimeter observations and wave–model hindcasts, it is likely that mean significant wave heights (SWH, defined as the average of the highest one third of wave heights) have increased in regions of the North Pacific and the North Atlantic over the past half century, and in the Southern Ocean since the mid 1980s ({Chapters.3 Chapter 3}, {cite.13.'Seneviratne_et_al_2012}). The limited observational wave record makes it difficult to separate long-term trends from multi decadal variability ({cite.13.'Young_et_al_2011}). A number of studies have related changes in wind–wave climatologies to modes of {Topics.*Climate_Variability climate variability} such as {Glossary.*El_Nin_o_Southern_Oscillation ENSO} ({cite.13.'Allan_and_Komar_2006}; {cite.13.'Adams_et_al_2008}; Menéndez et al., 2008), the {Glossary.*North_Atlantic_Oscillation NAO} ({cite.13.'Woolf_et_al_2002}; {cite.13.'Izaguirre_et_al_2010}), and the Southern Annular Mode ({Glossary.*Southern_Annular_Mode SAM}) ({cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2010}; {cite.13.'Izaguirre_et_al_2011}). Although {Glossary.*Anthropogenic anthropogenic} influences have been considered ({cite.13.'Wang_et_al_2009}), it is likely that reported SWH trends over the past half-century largely reflect natural variations in wind {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing}. Recent reductions in summer {Glossary.*Sea_ice sea ice} extent have resulted in enhanced wave activity in the Arctic Ocean due to increased fetch area and longer duration of the open-water season ({cite.13.'Francis_et_al_2011}; {cite.13.'Overeem_et_al_2011}).

In general, there is low confidence in {Topics.*Climate_Projections projections} of future storm conditions (Chapters {Chapters.12} and {Chapters.14}) and hence in projections of ocean waves. Nevertheless, there has been continued progress in translating {Topics.*Climate_Modelling climate model} outputs into wind–wave projections. In the {cite.1.'IPCC_2007 AR4}, projected changes in global SWHs were based on a single statistical model ({cite.13.'Wang_and_Swail_2006}). The projected conditions were consistent with increased wind speeds associated with mid-latitude storms, but they considered only a limited five-member {Glossary.*Ensemble ensemble} for a single future {Topics.*Emissions emission} scenario (SRES A2); wave parameters other than SWH were not considered.

Since the AR4, global wave–climate projections for the end of the 21st century have been made by dynamically {Glossary.*Downscaling downscaling} CMIP3 {Glossary.*Atmosphere_Ocean_General_Circulation_Model AOGCM} results. A multi-model ensemble based on dynamical models forced with various GHG emission scenarios (SRES A1B: {cite.13.'Mori_et_al_2010 Mori et al. (2010)}, {cite.13.'Fan_et_al_2013 Fan et al. (2013)}, {cite.13.'Semedo_et_al_2013 Semedo et al. (2013)}; SRES A2: {cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2012a Hemer et al. (2012a)}, as well as the statistical model of {cite.13.'Wang_and_Swail_2006 Wang and Swail (2006)} forced with emission scenarios IS92a and SRES A2 and B2, has been constructed as part of the Coordinated Ocean Wave Climate Project (COWCLIP) ({cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2013}). In general, the ensemble projected changes of annual mean SWH ({'Figure_13_26 Figure 13.26}a) resemble the statistical projections of {cite.13.'Wang_and_Swail_2006 Wang and Swail (2006)} under an A2 scenario. The largest change is projected to be in the Southern Ocean, where mean SWHs at the end of the 21st century are approximately 5 to 10% higher than the present-day mean. SWH increase in this {Topics.*Regional_Climate region} reflects the projected strengthening of the westerlies over the Southern Ocean, particularly during austral winter ({'Figure_13_26 Figure 13.26}c). Another region of SWH increase in the ensembles is in the tropical South Pacific associated with a projected strengthening of austral winter easterly trade winds in the CMIP3 multi-model data set ({'Figure_13_26 Figure 13.26}c). Negligible change or a mean SWH decrease is projected for all other ocean basins, with decreases identified in the trade wind region of the North Pacific, the mid-latitude westerlies in all basins, and in the trade and {Glossary.*Monsoon monsoon} wind regions of the Indian Ocean. {cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2013 Hemer et al. (2013)} found that variance of wave–climate projections associated with wave downscaling methodology dominated other sources of variance within the projections such as the {Topics.*Scenarios climate scenario} or climate model {Topics.*Uncertainty uncertainties}. {cite.13.'Mori_et_al_2013 Mori et al. (2013)} reported similar findings.

{image:'Figure_13_26}

Three CMIP3-based model projections ({cite.13.'Mori_et_al_2010}; {cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2012b}; {cite.13.'Fan_et_al_2013}) were used to compare projections of wave direction and period ({cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2013}). Wave direction ({'Figure_13_26 Figure 13.26}d) exhibits clockwise rotation in the tropics, consistent with a higher contribution from northward propagating swell from the Southern Ocean. Wave period ({'Figure_13_26 Figure 13.26}e) shows an increase over the eastern Pacific, which is also {Topics.*Attribution_of_Change attributed} to enhanced wave generation in the Southern Ocean and northward swell propagation. A projected decrease in wave periods in the North Atlantic and western and central North Pacific is symptomatic of weaker wind forcing in these regions.

SWH projections based on CMIP5 winds for emission scenarios RCP4.5 and {Glossary.*RCP8_5 RCP8.5} ({cite.13.'Dobrynin_et_al_2012}) exhibit similar regional patterns for the end of the 21st century to the CMIP3 results presented in {'Figure_13_26 Figure 13.26}A. {cite.13.'Dobrynin_et_al_2012 Dobrynin et al. (2012)} reported SWH increases in the Arctic Ocean, an area not considered by {cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2013 Hemer et al. (2013)}, and in basins connected to the Southern Ocean, particularly for RCP8.5. The probability of extreme wave heights is projected to increase in the SH, the

Arctic and Indian Oceans, but decrease in the North and Equatorial Atlantic and in the Pacific. In addition to wind changes, the projected loss of summer sea ice extent in the Arctic Ocean is very likely to increase overall wave activity there ({cite.13.'Manson_and_Solomon_2007}; {cite.13.'Overeem_et_al_2011}).

Model intercomparisons are starting to identify common features of global wave projections but in general there is low confidence in wave model projections because of uncertainties regarding future wind states, particularly storm geography, the limited number of model simulations used in the ensemble averages, and the different methodologies used to downscale climate model results to regional scales ({cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2012a}). Despite these uncertainties, it appears likely (medium confidence) that enhanced westerly surface winds in the SH (discussed in {Chapters.12 Chapter 12}) will lead to enhanced wave generation in that region by the end of the 21st century.

A number of dynamical wave {Glossary.*Projection projection} studies have been carried out with a regional focus. For the Mediterranean Sea, Lionello et al. (2008; 2010) projected a widespread shift of the wave height distribution to lower values by the mid-21st century under an SRES A1B scenario, implying a decrease in mean and extreme wave heights. Caires et al. (2008) and Debernard and Røed (2008) reported a decrease (4 to 6% of present values) in the annual 99th percentile SWH south of Iceland by the end of the 21st century, and an increase (6 to 8%) along the North Sea east coast (SRES A2, B2, A1B scenarios). {cite.13.'Grabemann_and_Weisse_2008 Grabemann and Weisse (2008)} found increases (up to 18% of present values) in annual 99th percentile SWH in the North Sea by the end of the 21st century, with an increase in the frequency of extreme wave events over large areas of the southern and eastern North Sea (SRES A2, B2 scenarios). {cite.13.'Charles_et_al_2012 Charles et al. (2012)} projected a general decrease in wave heights in the Bay of Biscay by the end of the 21st century (SRES A2, A1B, B1 scenarios), accompanied by clockwise rotations in winter swell (attributed to a projected northward shift in North Atlantic {Glossary.*Storm_tracks storm tracks}) and summer sea and intermediate waves (attributed to a projected slackening of westerly winds). Along the Portuguese coast, {cite.13.'Andrade_et_al_2007 Andrade et al. (2007)} found little projected change in SWH and a tendency for a more northerly wave direction than present (SRES A2 scenario).

In the Pacific, multi-model projections by {cite.13.'Graham_et_al_2013 Graham et al. (2013)} (SRES A2 scenario) indicate a decrease in boreal winter upper-quantile SWHs over the mid-latitude North Pacific by the end of the 21st century associated with a projected decrease in wind speeds along the southern flank of the main westerlies. There is a less robust tendency for higher extreme waves at higher latitudes. On the southeastern Australian coast, {cite.13.'Hemer_et_al_2012b Hemer et al. (2012b)} used multi-model projections (SRES A2 and B1 scenarios) to identify a decrease in mean SWH (<0.2 m) by the end of the 21st century compared to present due to a projected decrease in regional storm wave energy, and a shift to a more southerly wave direction, consistent with a projected southward shift of the subtropical ridge in the forcing fields.
