index: hide
name: Metacarpal Bones

The palm of the hand contains five elongated metacarpal bones. These bones lie between the carpal bones of the wrist and the bones of the fingers and thumb (see {'Figure_8_2_3 Figure 8.2.3}). The proximal end of each metacarpal bone articulates with one of the distal carpal bones. Each of these articulations is a  **carpometacarpal joint** (see {'Figure_8_2_4 Figure 8.2.4}). The expanded distal end of each metacarpal bone articulates at the  **metacarpophalangeal joint** with the proximal phalanx bone of the thumb or one of the fingers. The distal end also forms the knuckles of the hand, at the base of the fingers. The metacarpal bones are numbered 1–5, beginning at the thumb.

The first metacarpal bone, at the base of the thumb, is separated from the other metacarpal bones. This allows it a freedom of motion that is independent of the other metacarpal bones, which is very important for thumb mobility. The remaining metacarpal bones are united together to form the palm of the hand. The second and third metacarpal bones are firmly anchored in place and are immobile. However, the fourth and fifth metacarpal bones have limited anterior-posterior mobility, a motion that is greater for the fifth bone. This mobility is important during power gripping with the hand ({'Figure_8_2_6 Figure 8.2.6}). The anterior movement of these bones, particularly the fifth metacarpal bone, increases the strength of contact for the medial hand during gripping actions.


{image:'Figure_8_2_6}
        
