index: hide
name: Radius

The radius runs parallel to the ulna, on the lateral (thumb) side of the forearm (see {'Figure_8_2_2 Figure 8.2.2}). The  **head of the radius** is a disc-shaped structure that forms the proximal end. The small depression on the surface of the head articulates with the capitulum of the humerus as part of the elbow joint, whereas the smooth, outer margin of the head articulates with the radial notch of the ulna at the proximal radioulnar joint. The  **neck of the radius** is the narrowed region immediately below the expanded head. Inferior to this point on the medial side is the  **radial tuberosity**, an oval-shaped, bony protuberance that serves as a muscle attachment point. The  **shaft of the radius** is slightly curved and has a small ridge along its medial side. This ridge forms the  **interosseous border of the radius**, which, like the similar border of the ulna, is the line of attachment for the interosseous membrane that unites the two forearm bones. The distal end of the radius has a smooth surface for articulation with two carpal bones to form the  **radiocarpal joint** or wrist joint ({'Figure_8_2_3 Figure 8.2.3} and {'Figure_8_2_4 Figure 8.2.4}). On the medial side of the distal radius is the  **ulnar notch of the radius**. This shallow depression articulates with the head of the ulna, which together form the  **distal radioulnar joint**. The lateral end of the radius has a pointed projection called the  **styloid process of the radius**. This provides attachment for ligaments that support the lateral side of the wrist joint. Compared to the styloid process of the ulna, the styloid process of the radius projects more distally, thereby limiting the range of movement for lateral deviations of the hand at the wrist joint.
