index: hide
name: Solubility - Introduction

Imagine adding a small amount of salt to a glass of water, stirring until all the salt has dissolved, and then adding a bit more. You can repeat this process until the salt concentration of the solution reaches its natural limit, a limit determined primarily by the relative strengths of the solute-solute, solute-solvent, and solvent-solvent attractive forces discussed in the previous two modules of this chapter. You can be certain that you have reached this limit because, no matter how long you stir the solution, undissolved salt remains. The concentration of salt in the solution at this point is known as its solubility.

The  **solubility** of a solute in a particular solvent is the maximum concentration that may be achieved under given conditions when the dissolution process is  *at equilibrium*. Referring to the example of salt in water:

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mtext>NaCl</mtext><mrow><mo>(</mo><mi>s</mi><mo>)</mo></mrow><mspace width="0.2em"/><mo stretchy="false">⇌</mo><mspace width="0.2em"/><msup><mrow><mtext>Na</mtext></mrow><mtext>+</mtext></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mrow><mi>a</mi><mi>q</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow><mo>+</mo><msup><mrow><mtext>Cl</mtext></mrow><mtext>−</mtext></msup><mo stretchy="false">(</mo><mrow><mi>a</mi><mi>q</mi><mo stretchy="false">)</mo></mrow></mrow></math>

When a solute’s concentration is equal to its solubility, the solution is said to be  **saturated** with that solute. If the solute’s concentration is less than its solubility, the solution is said to be  **unsaturated**. A solution that contains a relatively low concentration of solute is called dilute, and one with a relatively high concentration is called concentrated.

If we add more salt to a saturated solution of salt, we see it fall to the bottom and no more seems to dissolve. In fact, the added salt does dissolve, as represented by the forward direction of the dissolution equation. Accompanying this process, dissolved salt will precipitate, as depicted by the reverse direction of the equation. The system is said to be at equilibrium when these two reciprocal processes are occurring at equal rates, and so the amount of undissolved and dissolved salt remains constant. Support for the simultaneous occurrence of the dissolution and precipitation processes is provided by noting that the number and sizes of the undissolved salt crystals will change over time, though their combined mass will remain the same.

Solutions may be prepared in which a solute concentration  *exceeds* its solubility. Such solutions are said to be  **supersaturated**, and they are interesting examples of  *nonequilibrium* states. For example, the carbonated beverage in an open container that has not yet “gone flat” is supersaturated with carbon dioxide gas; given time, the CO<sub>2</sub> concentration will decrease until it reaches its equilibrium value.
