index: hide
name: Ionic Compounds

To name an inorganic compound, we need to consider the answers to several questions. First, is the compound ionic or molecular? If the compound is ionic, does the metal form ions of only one type (fixed charge) or more than one type (variable charge)? Are the ions monatomic or polyatomic? If the compound is molecular, does it contain hydrogen? If so, does it also contain oxygen? From the answers we derive, we place the compound in an appropriate category and then name it accordingly.

## Compounds Containing Only Monatomic Ions

The name of a binary compound containing monatomic ions consists of the name of the cation (the name of the metal) followed by the name of the anion (the name of the nonmetallic element with its ending replaced by the suffix – *ide*). Some examples are given in .


| Names of Some Ionic Compounds |
|:-:|
| NaCl, sodium chloride | Na<sub>2</sub>O, sodium oxide |
| KBr, potassium bromide | CdS, cadmium sulfide |
| CaI<sub>2</sub>, calcium iodide | Mg<sub>3</sub>N<sub>2</sub>, magnesium nitride |
| CsF, cesium fluoride | Ca<sub>3</sub>P<sub>2</sub>, calcium phosphide |
| LiCl, lithium chloride | Al<sub>4</sub>C<sub>3</sub>, aluminum carbide |
    

## Compounds Containing Polyatomic Ions

Compounds containing polyatomic ions are named similarly to those containing only monatomic ions, i.e., by naming first the cation and then the anion. Examples are shown in .


| Names of Some Polyatomic Ionic Compounds |
|:-:|
| KC<sub>2</sub>H<sub>3</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, potassium acetate | NH<sub>4</sub>Cl, ammonium chloride |
| NaHCO<sub>3</sub>, sodium bicarbonate | CaSO<sub>4</sub>, calcium sulfate |
| Al<sub>2</sub>(CO<sub>3</sub>)<sub>3</sub>, aluminum carbonate | Mg<sub>3</sub>(PO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub>, magnesium phosphate |
    

## Compounds Containing a Metal Ion with a Variable Charge 

Most of the transition metals can form two or more cations with different charges. Compounds of these metals with nonmetals are named with the same method as compounds in the first category, except the charge of the metal ion is specified by a Roman numeral in parentheses after the name of the metal. The charge of the metal ion is determined from the formula of the compound and the charge of the anion. For example, consider binary ionic compounds of iron and chlorine. Iron typically exhibits a charge of either 2+ or 3+ (see {'Figure_2_6_IonCharges Figure 2.6.IonCharges}), and the two corresponding compound formulas are FeCl<sub>2</sub> and FeCl<sub>3</sub>. The simplest name, “iron chloride,” will, in this case, be ambiguous, as it does not distinguish between these two compounds. In cases like this, the charge of the metal ion is included as a Roman numeral in parentheses immediately following the metal name. These two compounds are then unambiguously named iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride, respectively. Other examples are provided in .


****

| Transition Metal Ionic Compound | Name |
|:-:|:-:|
| FeCl<sub>3</sub> | iron(III) chloride |
| Hg<sub>2</sub>O | mercury(I) oxide |
| HgO | mercury(II) oxide |
| Cu<sub>3</sub>(PO<sub>4</sub>)<sub>2</sub> | copper(II) phosphate |
    

Out-of-date nomenclature used the suffixes – *ic* and – *ous* to designate metals with higher and lower charges, respectively: Iron(III) chloride, FeCl<sub>3</sub>, was previously called ferric chloride, and iron(II) chloride, FeCl<sub>2</sub>, was known as ferrous chloride. Though this naming convention has been largely abandoned by the scientific community, it remains in use by some segments of industry. For example, you may see the words  *stannous fluoride* on a tube of toothpaste. This represents the formula SnF<sub>2</sub>, which is more properly named tin(II) fluoride. The other fluoride of tin is SnF<sub>4</sub>, which was previously called stannic fluoride but is now named tin(IV) fluoride.
