index: hide
name: Compounds Containing a Metal Ion with a Variable Charge 

Most of the transition metals and some main group metals can form two or more cations with different charges. Compounds of these metals with nonmetals are named with the same method as compounds in the first category, except the charge of the metal ion is specified by a Roman numeral in parentheses after the name of the metal. The charge of the metal ion is determined from the formula of the compound and the charge of the anion. For example, consider binary ionic compounds of iron and chlorine. Iron typically exhibits a charge of either 2+ or 3+ (see {'Figure_2_6_IonCharges Figure 2.6.IonCharges}), and the two corresponding compound formulas are FeCl<sub>2</sub> and FeCl<sub>3</sub>. The simplest name, “iron chloride,” will, in this case, be ambiguous, as it does not distinguish between these two compounds. In cases like this, the charge of the metal ion is included as a Roman numeral in parentheses immediately following the metal name. These two compounds are then unambiguously named iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride, respectively. Other examples are provided in .


****

| Compound | Name |
|:-:|:-:|
| FeCl<sub>2</sub> | iron(II) chloride |
| FeCl<sub>3</sub> | iron(III) chloride |
| Hg<sub>2</sub>O | mercury(I) oxide |
| HgO | mercury(II) oxide |
| SnF<sub>2</sub> | tin(II) fluoride |
| SnF<sub>4</sub> | tin(IV) fluoride |
    

Out-of-date nomenclature used the suffixes – *ic* and – *ous* to designate metals with higher and lower charges, respectively: Iron(III) chloride, FeCl<sub>3</sub>, was previously called ferric chloride, and iron(II) chloride, FeCl<sub>2</sub>, was known as ferrous chloride. Though this naming convention has been largely abandoned by the scientific community, it remains in use by some segments of industry. For example, you may see the words  *stannous fluoride* on a tube of toothpaste. This represents the formula SnF<sub>2</sub>, which is more properly named tin(II) fluoride. The other fluoride of tin is SnF<sub>4</sub>, which was previously called stannic fluoride but is now named tin(IV) fluoride.
