index: hide
public: ar5-
name: Section 8.7.1.1
title: 8.7.1.1 - Introduction

To quantify and compare the climate impacts of various {Topics.*Emissions emissions}, it is necessary to choose a climate parameter by which to measure the effects; that is, RF, temperature response, and so forth. Thus, various choices are needed for the steps down the cause–effect chain from emissions to climate change and impacts ({'Figure_8_27 Figure 8.27} and {Box_8_4 Box 8.4}). Each step in the cause effect chain requires a modelling framework. For assessments and evaluation one may—as an alternative to models that explicitly include physical processes resulting in {Topics.*Radiative_Forcing forcing} and responses—apply simpler measures or metrics that are based on results from complex models. Metrics are used to quantify the contributions to climate change of emissions of different substances and can thus act as ‘exchange rates’ in multi-component policies or comparisons of emissions from regions/countries or sources/sectors. Metrics are also used in areas such as Life Cycle Assessments and Integrated Assessment Modelling (e.g., by IPCC WGIII).

{image:'Figure_8_27}

Metrics can be given in absolute terms (e.g., K kg–1) or in relative terms by normalizing to a reference gas — usually {Glossary.*Carbon_dioxide CO2}. To transform the effects of different emissions to a common scale — often called ‘CO2 equivalent emissions’—the emission (Ei) of component i can be multiplied with the adopted normalized {Glossary.*Metric metric} (Mi): Mi × Ei = CO2-eqi. Ideally, the climate effects of the calculated CO2 equivalent emissions should be the same regardless of the mix of components emitted. However, different components have different physical properties, and a metric that establishes equivalence with regard to one effect cannot guarantee equivalence with regard to other effects and over extended time periods, for example, {cite.8.'Lauder_et_al_2013 Lauder et al. (2013)}, O’Neill (2000), {cite.8.'Smith_and_Wigley_2000 Smith and Wigley (2000)}, {cite.8.'Fuglestvedt_et_al_2003 Fuglestvedt et al. (2003)}.

Metrics do not define goals and policy—they are tools that enable evaluation and implementation of multi-component policies (i.e., which emissions to abate). The most appropriate metric will depend on which aspects of climate change are most important to a particular application, and different climate policy goals may lead to different conclusions about what is the most suitable metric with which to implement that policy, for example, {cite.8.'Plattner_et_al_2009 Plattner et al. (2009)}; {cite.8.'Tol_et_al_2012 Tol et al. (2012)}. Metrics that have been proposed include physical metrics as well as more comprehensive metrics that account for both physical and economic dimensions (see 8.7.1.5 and WGIII, {Chapters.3 Chapter 3}).

This section provides an assessment that focuses on the scientific aspects and utility of emission metrics. Extending such an assessment to include more policy-oriented aspects of their performance and usage such as simplicity, transparency, continuity, economic implications of usage of one metric over another, and so forth, is not given here as this is beyond the scope of WGI. However, consideration of such aspects is vital for user-assessments. In the following, the focus is on the more well-known Global Warming Potential ({Glossary.*Global_Warming_Potential GWP}) and Global Temperature change Potential (GTP), though other concepts are also briefly discussed.
