index: hide
name: Normal Microbiota of the Urogenital System

The normal  **microbiota** of different body sites provides an important nonspecific defense against infectious diseases (see <link:>), and the urogenital tract is no exception. In both men and women, however, the kidneys are sterile. Although urine does contain some antibacterial components, bacteria will grow in urine left out at room temperature. Therefore, it is primarily the flushing action that keeps the ureters and bladder free of microbes.

Below the bladder, the normal microbiota of the male urogenital system is found primarily within the distal urethra and includes bacterial species that are commonly associated with the skin microbiota. In women, the normal microbiota is found within the distal one third of the urethra and the vagina. The normal microbiota of the vagina becomes established shortly after birth and is a complex and dynamic population of bacteria that fluctuates in response to environmental changes. Members of the vaginal microbiota play an important role in the nonspecific defense against vaginal infections and sexually transmitted infections by occupying cellular binding sites and competing for nutrients. In addition, the production of  **lactic acid** by members of the microbiota provides an acidic environment within the vagina that also serves as a defense against infections. For the majority of women, the lactic-acid–producing bacteria in the vagina are dominated by a variety of species of  **Lactobacillus**. For women who lack sufficient lactobacilli in their vagina, lactic acid production comes primarily from other species of bacteria such as  **Leptotrichia** spp.,  **Megasphaera** spp., and  **Atopobium vaginae**.  *Lactobacillus* spp. use  **glycogen** from vaginal epithelial cells for metabolism and production of lactic acid. This process is tightly regulated by the hormone estrogen. Increased levels of estrogen correlate with increased levels of vaginal glycogen, increased production of lactic acid, and a lower  **vaginal pH**. Therefore, decreases in estrogen during the menstrual cycle and with menopause are associated with decreased levels of vaginal glycogen and lactic acid, and a higher pH. In addition to producing lactic acid,  *Lactobacillus* spp. also contribute to the defenses against infectious disease through their production of hydrogen peroxide and  **bacteriocins** (antibacterial peptides).
