index: hide
name: Anatomy of the Reproductive System

The male reproductive system ({'Figure_23_1_ReprodAnat Figure 23.1.ReprodAnat}) is located in close proximity to the urinary system, and the urethra is part of both systems. The  **testes** are responsible for the production of sperm. The  **epididymis** is a coiled tube that collects sperm from the testes and passes it on to the vas deferens. The epididymis is also the site of sperm maturation after they leave the testes. The  **seminal vesicles** and  **prostate** are accessory glands that produce fluid that supports sperm. During ejaculation, the  **vas deferens** releases this mixture of fluid and sperm, called semen, into the urethra, which extends to the end of the  **penis**.

The female reproductive system is located near the urinary system ({'Figure_23_1_ReprodAnat Figure 23.1.ReprodAnat}). The external genitalia ( **vulva**) in females open to the  **vagina**, a muscular passageway that connects to the cervix. The  **cervix** is the lower part of the  **uterus** (the organ where a fertilized egg will implant and develop). The cervix is a common site of infection, especially for viruses that may lead to cervical cancer. The uterus leads to the fallopian tubes and eventually to the ovaries. Ovaries are the site of ova (egg) production, as well as the site of  **estrogen** and progesterone production that are involved in maturation and maintenance of reproductive organs, preparation of the uterus for pregnancy, and regulation of the menstrual cycle.


{image:'Figure_23_1_ReprodAnat}
        
