index: hide
name: Osmosis and Osmotic Pressure of Solutions

A number of natural and synthetic materials exhibit  *selective permeation*, meaning that only molecules or ions of a certain size, shape, polarity, charge, and so forth, are capable of passing through (permeating) the material. Biological cell membranes provide elegant examples of selective permeation in nature, while dialysis tubing used to remove metabolic wastes from blood is a more simplistic technological example. Regardless of how they may be fabricated, these materials are generally referred to as  **semipermeable membranes**.

Consider the apparatus illustrated in {'Figure_11_4_osmosis Figure 11.4.osmosis}, in which samples of pure solvent and a solution are separated by a membrane that only solvent molecules may permeate. Solvent molecules will diffuse across the membrane in both directions. Since the concentration of  *solvent* is greater in the pure solvent than the solution, these molecules will diffuse from the solvent side of the membrane to the solution side at a faster rate than they will in the reverse direction. The result is a net transfer of solvent molecules from the pure solvent to the solution. Diffusion-driven transfer of solvent molecules through a semipermeable membrane is a process known as  **osmosis**.


{image:'Figure_11_4_osmosis}
        

When osmosis is carried out in an apparatus like that shown in {'Figure_11_4_osmosis Figure 11.4.osmosis}, the volume of the solution increases as it becomes diluted by accumulation of solvent. This causes the level of the solution to rise, increasing its hydrostatic pressure (due to the weight of the column of solution in the tube) and resulting in a faster transfer of solvent molecules back to the pure solvent side. When the pressure reaches a value that yields a reverse solvent transfer rate equal to the osmosis rate, bulk transfer of solvent ceases. This pressure is called the  **osmotic pressure (Π)** of the solution. The osmotic pressure of a dilute solution is related to its solute molarity,  *M*, and absolute temperature,  *T*, according to the equation

<math xmlns:q="http://cnx.rice.edu/qml/1.0" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:bib="http://bibtexml.sf.net/" xmlns:md="http://cnx.rice.edu/mdml" xmlns="http://cnx.rice.edu/cnxml"><mrow><mi>Π</mi><mo>=</mo><mi>M</mi><mi>R</mi><mi>T</mi></mrow></math>

where  *R* is the universal gas constant.

If a solution is placed in an apparatus like the one shown in {'Figure_11_4_rvosmosis Figure 11.4.rvosmosis}, applying pressure greater than the osmotic pressure of the solution reverses the osmosis and pushes solvent molecules from the solution into the pure solvent. This technique of reverse osmosis is used for large-scale desalination of seawater and on smaller scales to produce high-purity tap water for drinking.


{image:'Figure_11_4_rvosmosis}
        

Examples of osmosis are evident in many biological systems because cells are surrounded by semipermeable membranes. Carrots and celery that have become limp because they have lost water can be made crisp again by placing them in water. Water moves into the carrot or celery cells by osmosis. A cucumber placed in a concentrated salt solution loses water by osmosis and absorbs some salt to become a pickle. Osmosis can also affect animal cells. Solute concentrations are particularly important when solutions are injected into the body. Solutes in body cell fluids and blood serum give these solutions an osmotic pressure of approximately 7.7 atm. Solutions injected into the body must have the same osmotic pressure as blood serum; that is, they should be  **isotonic** with blood serum. If a less concentrated solution, a  **hypotonic** solution, is injected in sufficient quantity to dilute the blood serum, water from the diluted serum passes into the blood cells by osmosis, causing the cells to expand and rupture. This process is called  **hemolysis**. When a more concentrated solution, a  **hypertonic** solution, is injected, the cells lose water to the more concentrated solution, shrivel, and possibly die in a process called  **crenation**. These effects are illustrated in {'Figure_11_4_bloodcell Figure 11.4.bloodcell}.


{image:'Figure_11_4_bloodcell}
        
