index: hide
name: Acids and Bases

Acids and bases, like salts, dissociate in water into electrolytes. Acids and bases can very much change the properties of the solutions in which they are dissolved.

## Acids

An  **acid** is a substance that releases hydrogen ions (H<sup>+</sup>) in solution ({'Figure_2_4_3 Figure 2.4.3} **a**). Because an atom of hydrogen has just one proton and one electron, a positively charged hydrogen ion is simply a proton. This solitary proton is highly likely to participate in chemical reactions. Strong acids are compounds that release all of their H<sup>+ </sup>in solution; that is, they ionize completely. Hydrochloric acid (HCl), which is released from cells in the lining of the stomach, is a strong acid because it releases all of its H<sup>+ </sup>in the stomach’s watery environment. This strong acid aids in digestion and kills ingested microbes. Weak acids do not ionize completely; that is, some of their hydrogen<sup> </sup>ions<sup> </sup>remain bonded within a compound in solution. An example of a weak acid is vinegar, or acetic acid; it is called acetate after it gives up a proton.


{image:'Figure_2_4_3}
        

## Bases

A  **base** is a substance that releases hydroxyl ions (OH<sup>–</sup>) in solution, or one that accepts H<sup>+</sup> already present in solution (see {'Figure_2_4_3 Figure 2.4.3} **b**). The hydroxyl ions (also known as hydroxide ions) or other basic substances combine with H<sup>+ </sup>present to form a water molecule, thereby removing H<sup>+</sup> and reducing the solution’s acidity. Strong bases release most or all of their hydroxyl ions; weak bases release only some hydroxyl ions or absorb only a few H<sup>+</sup>. Food mixed with hydrochloric acid from the stomach would burn the small intestine, the next portion of the digestive tract after the stomach, if it were not for the release of bicarbonate (HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>–</sup>), a weak base that attracts H<sup>+</sup>. Bicarbonate accepts some of the H<sup>+</sup> protons, thereby reducing the acidity of the solution.

## The Concept of pH

The relative acidity or alkalinity of a solution can be indicated by its pH. A solution’s  **pH** is the negative, base-10 logarithm of the hydrogen ion (H<sup>+</sup>) concentration of the solution. As an example, a pH 4 solution has an H<sup>+</sup> concentration that is ten times greater than that of a pH 5 solution. That is, a solution with a pH of 4 is ten times more acidic than a solution with a pH of 5. The concept of pH will begin to make more sense when you study the pH scale, like that shown in {'Figure_2_4_4 Figure 2.4.4}. The scale consists of a series of increments ranging from 0 to 14. A solution with a pH of 7 is considered neutral—neither acidic nor basic. Pure water has a pH of 7. The lower the number below 7, the more acidic the solution, or the greater the concentration of H<sup>+</sup>. The concentration of hydrogen ions at each pH value is 10 times different than the next pH. For instance, a pH value of 4 corresponds to a proton concentration of 10<sup>–4</sup> M, or 0.0001M, while a pH value of 5 corresponds to a proton concentration of 10<sup>–5</sup> M, or 0.00001M. The higher the number above 7, the more basic (alkaline) the solution, or the lower the concentration of H<sup>+</sup>. Human urine, for example, is ten times more acidic than pure water, and HCl is 10,000,000 times more acidic than water.


{image:'Figure_2_4_4}
        

## Buffers

The pH of human blood normally ranges from 7.35 to 7.45, although it is typically identified as pH 7.4. At this slightly basic pH, blood can reduce the acidity resulting from the carbon dioxide (CO<sub>2</sub>) constantly being released into the bloodstream by the trillions of cells in the body. Homeostatic mechanisms (along with exhaling CO<sub>2</sub> while breathing) normally keep the pH of blood within this narrow range. This is critical, because fluctuations—either too acidic or too alkaline—can lead to life-threatening disorders.

All cells of the body depend on homeostatic regulation of acid–base balance at a pH of approximately 7.4. The body therefore has several mechanisms for this regulation, involving breathing, the excretion of chemicals in urine, and the internal release of chemicals collectively called buffers into body fluids. A  **buffer** is a solution of a weak acid and its conjugate base. A buffer can neutralize small amounts of acids or bases in body fluids. For example, if there is even a slight decrease below 7.35 in the pH of a bodily fluid, the buffer in the fluid—in this case, acting as a weak base—will bind the excess hydrogen ions. In contrast, if pH rises above 7.45, the buffer will act as a weak acid and contribute hydrogen ions.
